UK RESTRICTED UK RESTRICTED i Change 3 Issued November 1999 Superseding BR 21701 Dated April 1993 BR 21701 SHIP NBCD MANUAL VOLUME 1 THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HER BRITANNIC MAJESTYS GOVERNMENT. The information in this documen t is not to be communicated to any person not authorised by the MINISTRY OF DEFENCE to receive it. Any person finding this documentshould hand it to a British Forces unit or to a police station for its safe return to the Ministry of Defence, DDefSy, St Giles Court, 1-13 St Giles High Street, London, WC2H 8LD, with particulars of how and where found. THE UNAUTHORISED RETENTION OR DESTRUCTION OF THE DOCUMENT IS AN OFFENCE UNDER THE OFFICIALSECRETS ACTS OF 1911-1989. When released to persons outside government service, this document is issued on a personal basis and the recipient to whom it is entrusted in confidence, within the provisions of the OfficialSecrets Acts 1911-1989, is personally responsible for its safe custody and for seeing that its contents are disclosed only to authorized persons. By Command of the Defence Council COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF FLEETBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED ii UK RESTRICTEDSPONSOR This publication is sponsored by the Commander in Chief Fleet. All correspondence concerning this publication is to be forwarded to the Operational Public ations Authority CINCFLEETPFSA Fleet Staff Authors GroupPepys BuildingHMS COLLINGWOODFAREHAMHantsPO14 1AS Copied to the Lead Authority CINC FLEETSO1 N7 NBCD PP 300 West Battery Whale Island PortsmouthPO2 8DX UK Crown Copyright 1999 UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED iii Change 3PREFACE NBCD NAVAL NUCLEAR, BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL DEFENCE, DAMAGE CONTROL AND FIREFIGHTING NBCD concerns every Department and impinges on nearly every aspect of ship life. It directly affects the fighting efficiency of the Fleet and is the responsibility of every member of the ships company. The Ship NBCD Manual, BR 2170, comprises six volumes Volume 1 Deals with general aspects of NBCD and specific aspects of Damage Control and Firefighting DCFF. Volume 2 Deals with all aspects of NBC Defence. Volume 3 NBCD Stores Catalogue for HM Surface Ships and RFAs. Volume 4 NBCD for HM Submarines, including Stores. Volume 5 NBCD Advancement and Training Requirements. Volume 6 NBCD Incidents. Notes 1. These volumes use the System International S.I. units of measurement, except where imperial measurements are necessary. 2. For convenience, the terms he, his and him are used when referring to ships staff, although the billets could be filled by persons of either gender. Users wishing to comment on the contents of this publicati on should use the special form overleaf, copies of which are to be forwarded through the usual administrative channels to the addresses shown on page ii.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED iv UK RESTRICTEDPROPOSALS FOR CHANGES Classification...................................................................................... ShipEstablishment ....................................... Orig inating Dept .................................... Date ......... ................. Title of PublicationCurrent Issue Status DETAILS OF COMMENTS Page Para NumberComment Continue on a separate sheet if required Originator Name in Block LettersHead of Department Name in Block Letters Signature SignatureRankRate RankRate Classification......................................................................................UK RESTRICTED UK RESTRICTED v OriginalRECORD OF CHANGES Note The incorporation of temporary amendments such as RNTMs, DCIs, signals and AILs etc should be recorded on page vi overleaf. CHANGE NO.DATE INSERTEDSIGNATURE NAME REMARKS 1 AUG 2001 NA NA Incorporated in April 2002 reprint2 MAR 2002 NA NA 3 456789 10111213141516171819202122232425BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED vi UK RESTRICTEDRECORD OF TEMPORARY AMENDMENTS Note . The incorporation of RNTM, DCI, signal s and AILs etc should be recorded below. REFERENCE NO.DATE INSERTEDSIGNATURE NAME REMARKSUK RESTRICTED UK RESTRICTED vii Change 2CONTENTS Chapter 1 NBCD - Basic Principles Chapter 2 NBCD Responsibilities Chapter 3 Location and Identification Markings Chapter 4 NBCD States of Readiness Chapter 5 NBCD Conditions, Risk and Control Markings Chapter 6 Royal Fleet Auxiliary Chapter 7 Emergency Procedures at Sea and In Harbour Chapter 8 NBCD Command and Control Chapter 9 NBCD Communication Systems Chapter 10 NBCD Preparations for War and Action Chapter 11 Sabotage Attack in Ships - NBCD Countermeasures Chapter 12 Supply Department Chapter 13 Emergency Medical Organisation Chapter 14 Fire and Damage Chapter 15 Damage Control Practice Chapter 16 Leakstopping and Shoring Chapter 17 NBCD Arrangements in Icy Conditions Chapter 18 Ventilation Chapter 19 Electrical Aspects of Damage Control Chapter 20 Firefighting Organisation Chapter 21 Firefighting Procedures Chapter 22 High Pressure Sea Water Systems and Associated Firefighting Equipment Chapter 23 Firefighting Appliances and Installations Chapter 24 Fire Prevention and Firefighting in Upkeep Periods Chapter 25 Aircraft Firefighting Chapter 26 Personal Protection Chapter 27 Breathing ApparatusBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED viii UK RESTRICTEDCONTENTS Continued Chapter 28 Pumping, Draining and Ballasting Chapter 29 Ship Structure and Fittings Chapter 30 Basic Ship Stability Chapter 31 Stability of the Intact Ship Chapter 32 Stability of the Damaged Ship Chapter 33 Docking and Grounding Chapter 34 Damage Control and Firefighting Stores Chapter 35 NBCD Orders Chapter 36 Inspections, Tests and Trials INDEX LEPUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-1 Change 3CHAPTER 1 NBCD - BASIC PRINCIPLES CONTENTS Para Definition .......................................................... 0101 A i m s.............................................................. 0104 P e r s o n a l K n o w l e d g e ................................................. 0105 P r i n c i p l e s o f O r g a n i s a t i o n ............................................. 0106 NBCD Priorities ..................................................... 0108 Battle Damage Repair ................................................ 0110 N B C D O r g a n i s a t i o n.................................................. 0111 N B C D C o n t r o l P o s i t i o n s .............................................. 0112 N B C D M a n n i n g..................................................... 0114 T h e N B C D T e a m .................................................... 0115 C o n t r o l T e a m ....................................................... 0116 N B C P a r t i e s ........................................................ 0118 Q u a r t e r s ........................................................... 0119 Main Machinery Spaces ............................................... 0122 H a n g a r s a n d F l i g h t D e c k .............................................. 0123 ANNEXES Annex A Working Groups and CommitteesBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-3 OriginalCHAPTER 1 NBCD - BASIC PRINCIPLES Orders to be observed by the Comm anders of the Fleet and Land Companies under the charge and conduct of Sir Wa lter Raleigh, Knight, bound for the South parts of America or elsewhere. An offi cer or two shall be appointed to take care that no loose powder be carried between the decks, or near flint stock or match in hand. You shall saw divers hogsheads in two parts and filling them with waterset them aloft the decks. You shall divide your carpenters, some in hold if anyshot come between wind and water, and th e rest between decks, with plates of lead, plugs and all things necessary by them . You shall also lay by your tubs of water certain wet blankets to cast upon and choke any fire. Plymouth, May 1617. NBCD DIRECTLY AFFECTS THE FIGHTING EFFICIENCY OF THE FLEET AND IS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF EVERY MEMBER OF THE SHIPS COMPANY 0101. Definition Within all three Services and across NATO, NBCD is the abbreviation for N uclear, Biological and C hemical D efence. Although Damage Control and Firefighting is no longer part of the RNs formal definition of NBCD, it is accepted that in common usage within RN ships andsubmarines and the RFA Flotilla the term NBCD may be still be used to encompass both NBCDefence and Damage Control and Firefightin g DCFF. Personnel corresponding with the other Services or with NATO should be careful to use the abbreviations correctly. Therefore, NBCD means the doctrine, pro cedures and arrangements for a. Protection and defence against the eff ects of nuclear weapons, biological and chemical agents. Common meaning and within ships and submarines of the RN and RFA onlyb. Firefighting and the control of damage. 0102. Within BR 2170 NBCD will be used to mean both a. and b. above. NBC Defence will be used when only measures to counter the NBC threat are being discussed. 0103. Fleet NBCD policy matters are coordinated by a series of committees and working groupsparties, which are briefl y described in Annex 1A. Fe edback and proposals are to be forwarded through normal administrative authorities for discussion at the appropriate meeting.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-4 UK RESTRICTED0104. Aims a. The aim of NBC Defence is to protect personnel from the effects of chemical and biological agents and from the radiological hazards resulting from the operational useof nuclear weapons such that they can c ontinue to operate in an NBC environment. b. The aim of DCFF is to limit, control and repair within the ships resources material damage, however caused, in peace and war and to prot ect personnel from the effects of fire a nd damage generally. 0105. Personal Knowledge All members of the Ships Company are pot ential links in the NBCD organisation, and the action taken by them, whether as routine or as an emergency response, may prove decisive to the safety of the ship. Thus every pers on on board must have a thorough understanding of a. What to do in the case of a fire or fl ood, the first aid equipment available and how to use it. b. The need for watertight and gastight integrity the meanings of risk and control markings the use of location markings. c. The care and use of personal protection equipment.d. Elementary first aid.e. The layout of the ship and the wher eabouts of equipment for firefighting and emergency repair. f. The NBCD organisation and the f unction of NBCD control positions. g. The effects of damage.h. Radiation and cont amination, and how they can be minimised. i. The need for careful stowage of stores in storerooms and offices, and of personal belongings, to reduce the risk of fire, to avoid hampering repair operations or the pumping of compartments and to minimise th e potential for personal injury. Personnel must also understand the even more stringen t requirements of securing for action which will be ordered when damage through enemy action is possible. j. How to pass quick and accurate reports. The specific NBCD responsibilities of ke y personnel are outlined in Chapter 2. 0106. Principles of Organisation The NBCD organisation is founded on Damage Control and Firefighting DCFF with NBC defensive measures superimposed on the organisation when needed. Such flexibility isboth necessary and practical since fire and da mage are ever-present risks, whilst nuclear, biological and chemical attack are primarily a war risk.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-5 Change 30107. Success in NBCD depends mainly on a. Being materially prepared.b. Having well trained a nd knowledgeable personnel. c. Intelligent prior planning of responses to the most demanding of potential NBCD scenarios. These principles can only offer the chance of su ccess if each is regularly and frequently checked. They will need further review if it is anticipa ted that the ship will face a specific threat or particularly challenging circumstances, eg operations in an NBC environment in very hot climaticconditions. 0108. NBCD Priorities The relative priority given to safeguarding personnel and min imising damage to materiel depends on the operational circumstances at the time and requires consideration of the following factors a. The operational threat to the vessel and the Force. b. The availability of external assistance. c. That the fabric of the vessel provides the means of life support for her company. d. That the safety of an individual may be subor dinate to the safety of all or part of the Ships Company. 0109. The continuous spectrum of operational in tensity between peace and full scale war precludes a simple consideration of one or the other. Commandi ng officers are responsible for determining the balance between saving life, protecting their vessel and projecting military capability but the following principles are to be observed a.Alongside in Peacetime. With evacuation of the vessel possible and no complicating circumstances, the primary aim is to protect life unless there are factors present which mean that the optimum means of protecting life will be to direct the NBCD effort towards protecting the fabric of the vessel in the first instance. Such factors include the presence of ammunition, or that non-interven tion will contravene elements of the nuclear safety case or n eedlessly endanger othe r lives and property. b.At Sea in Peacetime. Maintaining a safe, life-sustaining vessel for the Ships Company is to be the primary aim of NBCD effort. c.Wartime. Maintaining effective military capability is the overriding aim. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-6 UK RESTRICTED0110. Battle Damage Repair Battle Damage Repair BDR is a standard NATO term for essential repair, which may be improvised, carried out rapidly in a battle environment in order to return damaged or disabledequipment to temporary service. The term is used regularly during Operational Sea Training OST, where a war environment is simulated, but it is not widely used in this book, as the DC FF procedures also apply to peace-time incidents. BDR is, therefore, a sub-set of DCFF and is not an alternative term. 0111. NBCD Organisation The NBCD organisation varies with the size a nd type of ship and, to an extent, with the size of the ships complement, although the basi c principles are the same. The organisation must be able to exercise the required degree of cont rol under all the differing circumstances in peace and war, and transition smoothl y from one set of conditions to another. The NBCD Command and Control organisation is detailed in Chapter 8. 0112. NBCD Control Positions The requirement for the allocation of NBCD control positions depends on the size of the ship a.Single NBCD Section Ships. In ships of DDFF size or smaller, NBCD Headquarters HQ1 controls a number of Fire and Repair Pa rties FRP, based at Fire and Repair Party Posts FRPP. An Alternative NBCD Headquarters AHQ is nominated for emergency use in th e event of HQ1 becoming untenable. b.Multi NBCD Section Ships. Larger ships, such as CVS, also have an HQ1, but are divided into a number of NBCD Sections num bered from forward to aft, each controlled by an NBCD Section Base. Each NBCD S ection has a number of FRPPs. In lieu of an AHQ, these ships have a permanently rigged Secondary NBCD Headquarters HQ2. In some ships HQ2 may be combined with one of the Section Bases. In a CVS thehangar and flight deck are classed as separate sections that are controlled from theHangar Control Room HCR and Aircra ft Control Room ACR respectively. 0113. Responsibility for immediate c ountermeas ures following action damage lies with the FRPP or the quarters or self-c ontained position, with coordina tion by HQ1SCC small ship or Section Base large ship. As a general rule, damage in machinery spaces, hangars, flight decks,tank decks and in quarters positions, is dealt with by the personnel stationed there, leaving the NBCD Team to deal with damage between decks. The extent to which quarters, machinery or Air Department crews can contribute to the total ship, post-damage, organisation will depend onwhether they are actively engaged in their primary duties. It may be necessary to augment NBCDteams from these sources in case of serious damage. Conversel y, NBCD teams may be needed to assist them, especially in the event of a la rge fire, heavy NBC contamination, or if extensive repairs are required. Rigid rule s cannot be applied the NBCD organisation must be flexible enough to deal with any form of emergency, a ll officers and ratings be ing trained accordingly. NBC protection and countermeasures are controlled directly from HQ1SCC, in consultation withthe Command in the Operations Room. Monitori ng and decontamination parties are drawn from NBCD teams, self-contained positions or an y other source, as circumstances allow. 0114. NBCD Manning Only in large ships CVSLPD are personnel included in the complement primarily forUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-7 Change 3NBCD duties. In the majority of ships Destroyers, Frigates, RFAs and MMPPs ratings required for NBCD duties are provi ded by all departments. The Executive Officer is responsible for nominating their duties on the NBCD Watch and Station Bill see Chapter 2. The manningrequirements for each NBCD state are detailed in Chapter 4. 0115. The NBCD Team The NBCD team is made up of the following a.Control. Manning the control positions of HQ1SCC, and HQ2 in large ships, electrical control positions a nd the Weapons Section Bases and Section Bases in large ships. b.Fire and Repair. Manning the Fire a nd Repair Party Posts. c.Special Parties. These comprise those pers onnel who man counterflood positions manual sprayflood positions larger sh ips and Mobile Repair Parties. d.NBC Parties. For cleansing station duties, mon itoring and decont amination parties. e.Self-contained Sections. Machinery spaces, hangars in CVS or other larger ships with embarked squadrons and tank decks in LPDs etc. f.Weapon Repair Teams. For repair of weapon equipment. 0116. Control Team In NBCD State 1, HQ1, SCC will normally be manned as follows a.Destroyers and Frigates 1 The Action NBCD Officer norma lly the Marine Engineer Officer. 2 The Damage Control Officer normally the Supply Officer. 3 A Weapons Engineering Department senior rating as the NBC Protection Officers Assistant. 4 An MEL senior rating as Damage Control Officer Electrical.5 A CCMEA as the Propulsion Manager.6 An Incident Board Operator.7 One or more Communication Numbers.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-8 UK RESTRICTEDb.Large Ships 1 The action NBCD Officer normally the MEO.2 The Damage Control Officer normally the ships NBCD Officer.3 The NBC Protection Officer normally the DWEO.4 An ME Officer andor MEL seni or rating as Damage Control Officer Electrical. 5 An ME Officer or CCMEA as Propulsion Manager.6 The Hull Section Officer.7 One Incident Board Operator for each NBCD section.8 Communication Numbers.9 NBCD Information Boards Operators.10 NBCPOs Assistant.11 An Information Number whose duty is to pass to HQ2 and the Operations Room all the information record ed on the various boards in HQ1. 12 A senior stores rating to assist the NBCD Officer in all matters pertaining to the arrangement and contents of store room s, provision of emergency stores and the organisation for keys to locked compartments. 0117. In large ships the control team also incl udes those officers and ratings who man the following a.HQ2. HQ2 will be manned by sufficient officers and ratings to mark up the information boards duplicating those in HQ1 and ME personnel for machinery and electrical power supply and di stribution purposes. In those ships in which HQ2 is combined with a Section Base, it will be manned by the minimum numbers additionalto the Section Base personnel to allow a smooth takeover from HQ1SCC if needed. b.Section Bases. Manned in NBCD State 1 by 1 Section Base Officer.2 Communication Number.3 Incident Board Operator.4 An operator to maintain ot her NBCD information boards.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-9 Change 35 A stores rating. 6 A MEL senior rating.7 A Communication Number to ope rate the telephone link to HQ1. 0118. NBC Parties Cleansing stations are manned by the Suppl y Department and as such those ratings selected should be noted on the Watch and Station Bill. Likewise, monitoring and decontamination teams, which is a whole ship commitment should also be noted on the Watch and Station Bill. 0119. Quarters The action crew at a quarter must be read y to take immediate NB CD counter-measures at or in the vicinity of their quarter s. Their organisation must allow for a. Emergency firefighting and general dama ge countermeasures when closed up at Action Stations. b. Monitoring and decontamination durin g a lull in or after an NBC attack. 0120. Personnel detailed for these duties should be selected from the quarters crews and specially trained in their NBCD duties, so that when called upon they form a trained team,adapted and equipped to perform any of the a bove duties. The following general principles apply a. The primary function of the quarter takes first priority. b. NBCD parties at quarters should, where po ssible, consist of personnel who can most easily be spared from their primary function, so that the quarter can continue to operate, though possibly at re duced efficiency. 0121. Quarters NBCD parties must be mobile in the sense that they can be detailed to assist elsewhere in the ship if the situation require s it. The number of personnel available for NBCD duties in a small ship is severely limited. It is therefore of the greatest importance that quarterspersonnel should be fully trained in all NBCD measures so that they can make an effective contribution to the ships NBCD organisation in an emergency. 0122. Main Machinery Spaces Where the number of personnel within the ME Department permits, machinery spaces should be manned by 2 ratings to enhance incide nt reporting, speed of response to damage and dispersal of ME personnel. Where possible one s hould be a Senior Rate. In some modern very lean manned ships it may not be possible to comply with this guidance. Such ships will normallybe equipped with comprehensive machinery a nd fireflood surveillance equipment as well as fixed firefighting systems. In these ships, to make the most effective use of available manpower, the machinery spaces may be left unoccupied and the personnel a llocated to either the Mobile Repair Party or an adjacent FRPP.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1-10 UK RESTRICTED0123. Hangars and Flight Deck All NBCD measures in hangars and on the flig ht deck of a CVS or other large ship with an embarked squadrons, are the responsibility of the Air Department, assistance being given by the NBCD sections and parties whenever n eeded. These NBCD measures are controlled from the Hangar Control Position HCP and Aircraft Control Room ACR respectively. Thesepositions are Section Bases, in communication w ith the ships NBCD HQ, and have broadcast systems for their respective areas. Both positi ons have the facility for emergency stopping of aircraft re-fuelling systems and the HCP has control of the fire curtains, spray systems and thehangar ventilation. Personnel manning these pos itions consist of the aircraft handlers and maintenance teams, the engineering department personnel who operate and maintain flight deck machinery and lifts, and the personnel attached to the embarked squadrons. The aircraft handlers are divided between the flight deck and hangar handling par ties and include hangar NBCD parties, consisting usually of one Petty O fficer plus seven junior rates for each hangar. All hands of the flight deck part y should be detailed for fire duties in the vicinity of their flying stations. Monitoring and decont amination requirements must also be met and the parties detailed should be trained not only to deal with contaminated structure or personnel, but also the with contaminated aircraft see BR 2170 Volume 2. In a small ship operating aircraft, the few air branch ratings borne must be backed up by ratin gs detailed from the Ships Company and trained in aircraft firefighting.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1A-1 Change 3ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 1 WORKING GROUPS AND COMMITTEES 1. NBCD Policy Making Organisation There is an integrated organisation in ships for the management of NBC Defence together with Damage Control and Firefighting DCFF, see Chapter 8. However, to align with triService practices, the structure for the policy management of these two disciplines is separatedsee Fig 1A-1. 2. Royal Navy NBC Defence Committee This committee is chaired by DNO. It is atte nded by representatives from all TLBs and the RN representatives from the tri-Service panels. This is the highest level forum for discussion ofRN including RFA NBC Defence policy. 3. Royal Navy NBC Materiel Group This Working Group is chaired by the Fleet NB CDO and is attended by representatives from CINCFLEET, 2SLCNH, HQRM, DDOR Eng NB C, DJW, DSTL Porton Down, DCT IPT, DPANBC IPT, FOST, FSAG, INM, WSA Integrated Project Teams, and the NBCD Training Group - Phoenix. It is a forum for discussi on of NBC equipment and facilities in the Royal Navy. 4. Royal Navy NBC Liaison Group This Group is chaired by Commander NBCD at the Phoenix NBCD Sc hool and is attended by representatives from CINCFLEET, 2SLCNH, FOST, MCTA, RALEIGH, FSAG, DSTL Porton Down, DJW, DNBCC, WSA Integrated Pr oject Teams, DPANBC IPT and the NBCD Training Group - Phoenix. It is a forum for the discussion of NBC training, documentation, procedures and policy. 5. Royal Navy DCFF Committee This Committee is chaired by Fleet ACOSW. It is attended by representatives from all TLBs. This is the highest level forum for the discussion of RN incl uding RFA DCFF policy. 6. Royal Navy DCFF Liaison Group This Group is chaired by Commander NBCD at the NBCD Training Group - Phoenix and is attended by representatives from CINCFL EET, FOST, MCTA, RALEIGH, WSAMFFM5, FSAG, DC IPT and the NBCD Training Group - Phoenix. It is a forum for the discussion of DCFF training documentati on, procedures and policy. 7. Surface Ship DCFF Working Group This Group is chaired by WSAMFFM5 a nd is attended by representatives from CINCFLEET, FOST, MCTA, FSAG, and WSA Integrat ed Project Teams. It is a forum for the discussion of DCFF arrangements in RN and RFA surface vessels. 8. Submarine DCFF Working Group This Group is chaired by WSAMFFM5 a nd is attended by representatives from CINCFLEET, FOSTSM, FSAG, STG, and WSA Integr ated Project Teams. It is a forum for the discussion of DCFF arra ngements in submarines. UK RESTRICTED 1A-2 UK RESTRICTED9. NBCD Training Policy Advisory Group NBCD TPAG This is chaired by the MWS Cdr TPOL. It is attended by representatives from CINCFLEET, FOTR, DNM, CND, FOST, training establishments and INM. It is a forum for the coordination of all Royal Navy NBCD training.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 1A-3 Original Fig 1A-1. NBC Defence and DC FF Working Groups and CommitteesUK RESTRICTED 1A-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-1 Change 3CHAPTER 2 NBCD RESPONSIBILITIES CONTENTS Para E x e c u t i v e O f f i c e r .................................................... 0202 Heads of Departments HODs - General ................................. 0204 M a r i n e E n g i n e e r O f f i c e r M E O ........................................ 0205 Logistics and Supply Officer LSO ..................................... 0206 Weapon Engineer Officer ............................................. 0207 C T G N B C A d v i s e r................................................... 0208 H e a d o f t h e A i r D e p a r t m e n t............................................ 0209 M e d i c a l O f f i c e r ..................................................... 0211 H u l l S e c t i o n O f f i c e r.................................................. 0213 D e p u t y M a r i n e E n g i n e e r O f f i c e r ........................................ 0214 Deputy Weapon Engineer OfficerSection Officer .......................... 0215 Officer of the Day OOD ............................................. 0218 O t h e r O f f i c e r s ...................................................... 0219 D e p a r t m e n t a l N B C D Q u a l i f i e d S e n i o r R a t i n g s N B C D Q s ................... 0220 A c t i o n N B C D O ..................................................... 0224 N B C D O f f i c e r - L a r g e S h i p s ........................................... 0225 D a m a g e C o n t r o l O f f i c e r D C O ........................................ 0226 C o m m a n d A d v i s e r ................................................... 0227 D a m a g e C o n t r o l O f f i c e r E l e c t r i c a l D C O L ............................. 0228 The Propulsion Manager .............................................. 0229 N B C P r o t e c t i o n O f f i c e r ............................................... 0230 N B C P r o t e c t i o n O f f i c e r s A s s i s t a n t...................................... 0231 N B C D e f e n c e W a t c h C o o r d i n a t o r ....................................... 0232 M e t e o r o l o g i c a l O f f i c e r................................................ 0233 NBCD Responsibilities in Minewarfare and Patrol Ve ssels MMPPs .......... 0234 N B C D T r a i n i n g O r g a n i s a t i o n .......................................... 0235BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-3 Change 1CHAPTER 2 NBCD RESPONSIBILITIES 0201. As with every aspect of a ships operati on, the ultimate responsibility for NBCD is with the Commanding Officer. Responsibility for prepar ation and training in NBCD rests with all departments, and the a pplication of countermeasures, althoug h mainly the responsibility of the NBCD team, is shared by those departments controlling the spaces in which countermeasures may be needed eg machinery spaces, armament qua rters, hangars, galleys and storerooms. It is the duty of everyone, by good ship husba ndry, knowledge of the ship and the proper appreciation of the NBCD problem, to minimize the ri sks to a ship at sea and in harbour, in peace and in war. Implicit in this is a responsibility to enhance individual and collective lifesaving by a thorough knowledge of the survival and NB C protection equipment onboard. NBCD and survival at sea training are indi sputably linked and ships organisa tions are to reflect this. The NBCD Command and Control organisa tion is covered in Chapter 8. 0202. Executive Officer The Executive Officer is responsible to the Commanding Officer for a. Being able to assume the NBCD re sponsibilities of the Commanding Officer. b. Directing the NBCDO when one is appointed.c. Assuming the duties of the ships NBCDO where no officer is appointed specifically for NBCD duties, ie 1 Arranging training and control of HQ1 watchkeepers and ensuring the effectiveness of the watertight integrity, safety, rounds and keys organisation, except when MEO is closed up in HQ1 as a result of an emergency or as Action NBCDO. 2 Monitoring changes in the watertight condition.3 Monitoring changes in the state of readiness.4 Coordinating the whole ship NBCD training organisation.5 Being chairman of the NBCD Planning and Training Committee.6 Arranging the maintenance of the NBCD Watch and Station Bill.7 Coordinating the production of NBCD Standing Orders. 8 Arranging the maintenance of the NB CD Training and Material Assessment Log. 9 Ensuring NBCD publications are amended. 10 Directing the Whole-Ship NBCDQ and coordinating the work of all NBCDQs.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-4 UK RESTRICTEDd. Carrying out the NBCD duties of a Head of Department for the Warfare Department. e. At action, being stationed as directed by the Command or to rove, visiting scenes of NBCD incidents 1 Monitoring NBCD preparations for action.2 Assessing damage and incident response and keeping ANBCDO and WEOCommand informed of the overall situation. 3 Coordinating actions at incidents except stability counter-measures. 4 Directing the CBM who will also be roving. f. Training the whole Ships Company in survival and lifesaving.g. Ensuring that a minimum of 10 of the Ships Company are first aid trained.h. Being the Officer with Medical Charge when a Medical Officer is not borne. 0203. Where an officer is appoint ed specifically for NBCD duties, some of the above Executive Officers NBCD duties may be delegated to him. 0204. Heads of Departments HODs - General Heads of Departments are re sponsible to the Command for a. Carrying out the NBCD duties of an officer and supervising all other officers in the department in their NBCD duties. b. Giving technical advice to the Comma nd on their own departmental aspects of NBCD. c. Administering depa rtmental NBCD, ie 1 Producing their departmental s ection of ships NBCD Orders. 2 Producing NBCD orders for any sel f-contained NBCD sections that may be allied to the departmental function. eg main machinery spaces, flight decks, hangars, vehicle decks a nd docks in certain ships 3 Providing suitably qualified persons to the whole-ship NBCD training organisation. 4 Providing personnel to the NBCD orga nisation as required by the Watch and Station Bill. d. Directing the departmental NBCDQ.e. Managing department al NBCD training.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-5 Change 3f. Managing aspects of whole-ship NBCD training for which the department is responsible. g. Being a member of the ships NBCD Planning and Training Committee and assisting in the production and execution of the whole-ship NBCD training programme. h. Provisioning of specialist advice and ma intenance for NBCD equipment which is the responsibility of his de partment, but situated in a space owned by another department. i. Bringing to the attention of the responsib le department details of any defects found with NBCD equipment, situated in his departmental spaces, which is not theresponsibility of his department. 0205. Marine Engineer Officer MEO The MEO is responsible to the Command for a. Carrying out the NBCD duties of a Head of Department for the Marine Engineering Department. b. Being the Action NBCDO ANBCDO.c. Taking overall control of da mage control and firefighting measures when closed up in HQ1, as a result of an emergency, at NBCD State 2 or 3. d. The custody and maintenance of all da mage control and firefighting equipment except that on the charge of the Air Department, including the following Day to daychecks and servicing may be de legated to the Part of Ship Officer responsible for the compartment in which the equipment is stowed 1 Portable firefighting equipment.2 Portable pumping equipment.3 Breathing and life support apparatus. e. The maintenance, integrity and operation of all material arrangements for the collective protection from fire damage a nd NBC hazards, including the following 1 Watertight and gastight structure, fixtures and fittings.2 Ventilation, filtration, air conditi oning and smoke clearance systems. 3 All fixed firefighting systems except t hose which are the responsibility of the WEO or AEO. 4 Fixed pumping and salvage systems.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-6 UK RESTRICTEDf. The organisation and training of fire , repair and damage control parties. g. Training all ships pers onnel in firefighting methods. h. Ensuring that HQ1, HQ2 or AHQ, Secti on Bases and FRPPs are provided with all necessary drawings, lists, check-off, route a nd isolation cards, aide s-memoire and other support equipment required to assist in the proper management of NBCD at action and in peace-time emergencies bot h at sea and in harbour. 0206. Logistics and Supply Officer LSO The LSO is responsible to the Command for a. Carrying out the NBCD duties of a Head of Department for th e Supply Department. b. Being the Damage Control Officer DCO except where an officer is appointed specifically for NBCD duties. c. As DCO, assisting MEO in HQ1, when closed up in an emergency at States 2 and 3.d. The special provision of food when the situation precludes normal feeding arrangements. e. The custody, provision and resupply of nava l and victualling stores at all states of readiness, including arrangements for emergency supply, together with the 1 Protection of stores fro m damage or contamination. 2 Dispersal of stores.3 Stowage of stores in order to allo w access to bulkheads or ships sides and to minimise fire and flooding risks. 4 Custody and stowage of IPE and NBC st ores except those in the charge of WE or medical staffs. 5 Issue of IPE and, when required, clean clothing at cleansing stations. f. Training of Action First Aid Party personnel in support of medical staff. g. Training of cleansing station crews.h. The whole-ship training programme in respect of individual NBC personal protection measures and procedures.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-7 Change 30207. Weapon Engineer Officer The Weapon Engineer Officer WEO is responsible to the Command for a. Carrying out the NBCD duties of a Head of Department for the Weapon Engineering Department. b. Acting as the Command Adviser in the Ac tion State and during NBCD State 2 and State 3 emergencies. c. The custody and maintenance of all NBC fitted and portable monitoring and decontamination equipment. d. The management of the NBC organisation.e. The whole-ship training of personnel with monitoring and decontamination responsibilities, including ope rational decontamination. f. The training of Weapon Repair Teams.g. The maintenance, integrity and operation of magazine fixed firefighting systems. h. The custody and maintenance of aircraft firefighting arrangements, when the Ships Flight are not embarked. 0208. CTG NBC Adviser WEOs of capital ships are to complete the 2-day NBC Staff Officers Briefing at DNBCC Winterbourne Gunner to prepare them to undertake the role of CTG NBC Adviser, should that be required. The deployable UK Maritime Battle Staffs COMUKMARFOR and COMUKAMPHIBFOR have bespoke NBC Advisers integral within their staff. COMATG may be allocated an NBC Adviser for specific operations but it is anticipated that he will also have a bespoke NBC Advise r in due course. 0209. Head of the Air Department The Head of the Air Department is responsible to the Command for a. Preservation of watertight andor gastight integrity in the Air Department spaces to accord with the ships ordered NBCD condition. b. The distribution of porta ble firefighting equipment taking guidance from the NBCD Class Book and dama ge repair equipment in Air Department spaces. c. The maintenance of specialized aircraft firefighting equipment.d. The continuation training of Air Depa rtment personnel in specialized aircraft firefighting techniques, and those NBC m onitoring and decont amination procedures which are peculiar to aircraft.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-8 UK RESTRICTEDe. In conjunction with the Action NBCD O fficer, the firefighting and damage repair in all major Air Department spaces, augmenting the ships NBCD organisation whenrequired and as directed by HQ1 or HQ2. 0210. If a ship operating aircraft has no separate Air Department, NBCD matters remain the responsibility of the Executive Officer and the respective HODs. 0211. Medical Officer The particular aspects of NBCD for which the Medical Officer or the Executive Officer where no Medical Officer is borne is responsible are a. The medical treatment of casualties.b. The organisation for immunization of pe rsonnel against BW agents and other prophylactic or post-attack medical countermeasures ag ainst BW or CW agents. c. Assistance to the WEO in evaluating for the Command with regard to future operations the effects of biological and chemical agents and nuclear radiation experienced by the Ships Company. d. The pathological effects of biological and chemical ag ents and nuclear radiation. e. First aid training.f. Investigating and dealing with the contamination of f ood and fresh water. g. The organisation, equipment and manning of first aid posts and emergency operating stations, and the distribution and pe riodical turnover of fi rst aid equipment at quarters. h. Interpreting and holding the permanent clinical records of radiation received by the Ships Company, and records of pers onnel contaminated by B or C agents. i. The custody of NBC medical stores, eg WTK BC, BATS, Combopens and NAPS. 0212. The Medical Officer or senior medical rating where no MO is borne is responsible to the Executive Officer for the execution and coordination of first aid training, with the specificsupport of the Supply Officer in respect of the coordination of Action Fi rst Aid Party initial and continuation training. 0213. Hull Section Officer In ships so complemented, the Hull Section Officer is the structural specialist and is responsible to the MEO see BR 3000 - Marine En gineering Manual. In circumstance of high NBCD risk, his place of duty is normally HQ1. Should he consider that he is needed at the scene of an incident elsewhere, he may proceed there, subject to the approval of the MEO. His dutiesinclude a. The training of all DC personnel in the care and maintenance of watertight openings, leak stopping and shoring.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-9 Change 1b. The distribution and maintenance of all materials for structural repair. c. The maintenance of hull structure, fittings and systems. 0214. Deputy Marine Engineer Officer The DMEO is to be the MEOs immediate deputy in all NBCD related matters. The DMEO is to assume the MEOs Action role if the MEO is unabl e to undertake or continue his duties. In frigates and destroyers where only two Marine Engineering Officers are borne, DMEO is to be based at the FRPP most distant from HQ1, normally forward. Th e overriding aim of this stationing is to ensure the DMEOs physical displacement from the MEO prior to major damagebeing sustained and thus reduce the risk of both o fficers being injured in an attack. In ships where only one Engineer Officer is borne, suppor ted by a Warrant Officer or CCMEA as deputy, another suitably trained officer with good ship knowledge should be stati oned in charge of this FRPP. The WOSR deputy to MEO is to remain responsible for machinery control as the Action MEOOW. 0215. Deputy Weapon Engineer OfficerSection Officer The DWEOSection officer is the WEOs deputy in all NBCD related matters and is to assume the WEOs Action role if WEO is unable to undertake or c ontinue his duties. Otherwise, at Action Stations he is based at the Wea pon Section Base WSB c ontrolling the activities of the Weapon Repair Party WRP. 0216. The DWEOSection Officer will be the NBC Protection Officer NBCPO, based in the WSB, receiving information from the NBCPO Assistant in HQ1, coordinating responses andbriefing the WEO as Command Adviser. 0217. When the NBC threat level increases to Medium, DWEO is to delegate technical matters to the CCWEAs in the WSB, and act as NBCPO in HQ1. If a Section Officer is borne, he is to transfer from the Alternative WSB to the WSB to supervise technical matters. 0218. Officer of the Day OOD All Officers in the OOD roster must be cap able of undertaking the following duties a. Being responsible for the safety and security of the ship and the Ships Companyin harbour. b. Being aware of all hazardous activ ities being undertaken in the ship. c. Controlling the following routine tasks of the Duty WatchHarbour Fire and Emergency Party HFEP 1 Briefing and allocating tasks to the HFEP at the start of the duty period.2 Directing the work of HQ1 and gangway watchkeepers.3 Monitoring alarms and emergency telephones. 4 Rounds.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-10 UK RESTRICTED5 RADHAZ. 6 Watertight and gastight integrity.7 Fuel and ammun ition danger pipes. 8 Welding and burning.9 Keys.10 Responding to emergencies, including the following actions a Make pipes directing actions by th e HFEP, the remainder of the Ships Company and any visitors. b Crash stop ventilation.c Start HPSW system pumps.d Inform outside authorities in accordance with local orders. d. Taking personal charge of the HFEP during emergencies, normally from HQ1 by 1 Assessing the situation and establishing control.2 Directing the activities of all emer gency parties and specialist personnel. 3 Clearing ship of all other personne l if necessary and directing them to supplement the HFEP as required. 4 Liaising with all outsi de authorities and integra ting any offered support with the activities of the HFEP, eg Local Authority Fire Brigade. 5 Responding to external incidents in accordance with local orders, eg PORTSAFE. 6 Making follow-up reports following in cidents, consulting or recalling other ships officers as required. 7 Ensuring that a narrative of events is kept. f. Conducting Duty Watch safety training in accordance with the Harbour Watch Training Log. 0219. Other Officers All other Officers must be capable of a. Carrying out the NBCD duties of an AB, LH and SR.b. Carrying out the NBCD duties of a Divisional Officer.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-11 Change 11 Checking ratings personal NBCD equipment. 2 Monitoring and conducting advancem ent and ship knowledge training. 3 Updating divisional NBCD documentation.4 Forwarding information for updating the ships NBCD Training and Material Assessment Log. 5 Monitoring and counse lling of stress casualties. c. Carrying out the duties of a Part of Ship Officer 1 The care of NBCD markings in the part of ship.2 Maintaining the structure, fittings and NBCD equipment in the part of ship which is not the clear responsibility of another depar tment or officer. 3 Passing to the responsib le department deta ils of defects of NBCD equipment in departmental spaces which is not th e responsibility of th e owner department. 4 Ensuring a high standard of NBCD and equipment knowledge of personnel who live or work in the part of ship. d. Carrying out the duties of an Officer in Ch arge of a quarter, post, section or living space 1 Taking charge of immediate measures to deal with NBCD incidents occurring in their spaces. 2 Training of quarters crews and us ers of a space to take immediate NBCD measures in that space. 3 Keeping HQ1 and dedicated NBCD parties informed of immediate NBCD actions carried out by quarter s crews and users of spaces. 0220. Departmental NBCD Qualifie d Senior Ratings NBCDQs In ships of DDFF size and above, all departme nts are to have at least one NBCD qualified senior rating. Numbers will depend on the ships Scheme of Complement, but in atypical DDFF there are normally six NBCDQs. 0221. It will seldom be possible to provide such senior ratings for NBCD duties on a full time basis, since personnel suitable for the task will, by dint of experience and position, have time- consuming specialist commitments to fulfil. The senior ratings nominated for coordination ofNBCD departmental tasks must be capable of directing the NBCD work of ratings within theirown department. They are additionally to play a full part in the planning, coordination and execution of the whole-ship NBCD and survival training programme.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-12 UK RESTRICTED0222. In general terms, NBCDQs unde rtake the duties listed below a.General 1 In conjunction with other NBCDQs, to check that the recommended NBCD practices tidy living, correct stowage of gear, maintenance of markings and fittings,etc are followed at all times. 2 In conjunction with other NBCDQs, to train ratings in their general NBCD responsibilities and for advancement to higher rate see BR 21705. 3 Where no suitably qualified senior rating is borne in a particular department, to assist with general and advancement training in that department. b.In Support of their Head of Department 1 To undertake specific instruction in par ticular aspects of NBCD as directed by the NBCD Officer or their HOD. 2 To assist in the writing and amending of NBCD Orders.3 To provide inputs to the NBCD Traini ng and Material Assessment Log and to bring attention to any amendments which should be made to the NBCD Class Book CB 4538 series. 4 To bring to the notice of the appr opriate HOD shortcomings in the NBCD organisation, the NBCD Watch and Station Bill, and in NBCD material standards. 5 To be conversant with the catalogue of NBCD stores BR 2170, Volume 3 for surface vessels, Volume 4 for submarines, and to ensure the outfit of NBCD stores for which the department is responsible is under constant review, so that the correct stocks are held and replacem ents demanded as necessary. 6 To arrange instruction and exercises fo r those ratings detailed as plotters and communication numbers in the NBCD or ganisation, in conjunction with other NBCDQs as appropriate. 7 To coordinate and, wh ere appropriate, conduct tr aining in delegated departmental NBCD and survival topics including those for which the department has a whole-ship training responsibility. c.In Liaison with Other Departments 1 To liaise closely with other depa rtmental NBCDQs and departmental coordinators and, in particular, to keep the Warfare Branch NBCDQ, in his capacity as overall Survival and NBCD Training Coordinator, informed of training intentions. 2 To assist as necessary with coor dination of whole-ship NBCD training commitments and exercises.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-13 Original0223. Certain specific responsibilities are allocated to departmental senior ratings as follows a.Warfare Department 1 In the training coordination role, th e XO is to be supported by a Warfare Branch NBCDQ. This post is to be filled by a senior rating qualified in bothsurvival at sea and NBCD, and it will be his function to coordinate and keep arecord of the training activities of all other departmental NBCDQs. He is to haveparticular responsibility for surv ival and lifesaving training. 2 In the majority of ships, the Chief Bosuns Mate CBM will be free to rove in the Action State. To ensure that he is able to contribute effectively to the NBCDeffort in this role, the CBM must be NBCD qualified. This requirement, coupled with the NILE training already given as part of Seaman Specialist training, makesthe CBM the most suitable man for the NB CD coordination role described above. 3 The XO is to be further assisted in the execution of his duties by other suitably qualified Warfare Branch ratings. These ar e to include a senior rating, other than the CBM, who will assist with the general NBCD training specifically of WarfareBranch ratings, with the conduct of NBCD communications and whole-ship exercises and with the Warfare Branch related NBCD duties. Additional support is to be given by a rating qualified to maintain NILE equipment and assist inNILElifesavingsurvival instructions. b.Marine Engineering Department 1 Under the direction of the MEO, the ME Department NBC DQ is to coordinate the organisation and training of fire a nd repair and damage control personnel and the instruction of the whole Ships Company in firefighting measures. The MEDepartment NBCDQ is normally to be the CMEMML. 2 The ME Department NBCDQ is to be assisted in the execution of his duties by other NBCD qualifie d ME senior ratings. c.Weapon Engineering Department. In addition to the duties outlined in Para 0222, the WE department NBC senior rating is to be the NBC Protection Officers Assistant see Para 0231. d.Supply Department 1 The Supply Officer is to be supporte d by the Supply Department Coordinator who, himself, need not be NBCD or NBC trained. The Supply Department Coordinator is to assist in coordination of Action First Aid Parties training, and is to direct the involvement of NBC qualif ied Supply Department senior ratings in NBC and NBCD related tasks.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-14 UK RESTRICTED2 A NBC qualified Supply De partment senior rating is to be responsible for training Cleansing Station Crews and for th e overall training of the Ships Company in NBC individual protective equipment I PE dressing and undr essing procedures as required. 3 A NBC qualified Supply Depa rtment senior rating is to lead in the training of the Ships Company in NBC personal protective measures. 4 A Supply Department seni or rating is to have cust ody of all NBC protective clothing and NBC stores except those in the specific charge of the CWEM ormedical staff. 0224. Action NBCDO The Action NBCDO is responsible to the Commanding Officer for a. Taking overall charge of the SCC, at St ate 1 and during emergencies in States 2 and 3. b. Reacting to the Command Aim.c. Informing the Command of all matters which effect the availability of the ship as a weapons platform, advising on the impli cations of incidents and defects, and recommending priorities for repairs. Areas covered include 1 Propulsion systems.2 Ship services.3 Services to weapons, aircraft and sensors.Except where a WE or Air department responsibility 4 Hull structure.5 Watertight and gastight integrity.6 Stability.7 Damage control and firefighting.8 NBC collective protection.9 Casualties. d. Coordinating the activities of, and giving priorities and direction to the SCC team, ie 1 The DCO.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-15 Change 32 The Propulsion Manager. 3 The DCOL. e. Giving priorities and direction to officers in charge of self-contained NBCD Sections and coordinating their activities with that of the SCC team. f. Liaising with the WEO on the interface between DC and ME activities, and warfare teams, quarters crews, monitoring and dec ontamination teams, cleansing personnel and the Weapon Repair Party. g. Monitoring reports from the XO, when roving, recommending incidents to visit.h. Authorizing the use of non-automatic fi xed firefighting and flooding systems and coordinating stability counter-measures. j. Recommending to the Command, changes in the NBCD State of Readiness to deal with peacetime emergencies if the incident is beyond the capability of watchkeepers or the SSEP. 0225. NBCD Officer - Large Ships In large ships where an officer is appointed specifically for NBCD duties he is to be known as the NBCD Officer. He assists the Ex ecutive Officer and provi des professional advice on firefighting, damage control and NBC matters to other HODs in the discharge of their NBCD responsibilities. His principal duties are a. To be the DCO.b. To produce NBCD Standing Orders, incl uding those for the various states of readiness and to check that Departmental Regulators maintain accurate departmentalWatch Bills. c. To arrange and supervise all NBCD trai ning programmes and exercises, in support of HODs. d. The overall organisation of NBCD pers onnel and equipment throughout the ship. e. To direct the organisation for maintaining watertight and gastight integrity in the different NBCD conditions, and the arra ngements for closing down the ship. f. The organisation and training of HQ1 NB CD watchkeepers, the maintenance of the ordered watertight a nd gastight conditions, and the c ontrol of keys except keys to magazines in the security condition. g. Monitoring the maintenance of all NBCD markings.h. Monitoring the correct stowage and readiness of NBCD equipment, except that for which the NBC Protection Officer or Medical Officer is responsible.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-16 UK RESTRICTED0226. Damage Control Officer DCO In ships such as DDFF, where no officer is appointed specifically for NBCD duties, another officer, normally the Logi stics and Supply Officer, will be the DCO. He is to be fully conversant with the ships NBCD organisation a nd ship layout and will direct the employment of damage control and FAP personnel, referring to the Action NBCDO for priorities andguidance. The duties of the DCO are a. To be in HQ1 at State 1 and durin g emergencies at States 2 and 3. b. To direct NBCD preparations by 1 Monitoring changes in Watertight and Gastight Condition.2 Monitoring changes in the State of Readiness. c. Giving priorities to NBCD incidents and monitoring r eactions of NBCD Section Bases FRPPs in single Section ships d. Coordinating reaction to NBCD incident s which cut across Section or FRPP area boundaries. e. Re-deploying resources between Sections or FRPs when required. f. Ensuring that immediate reactions to incidents by quarters crews etc. are coordinated with the work of the de dicated FRP and First Aid Parties. g. Directing the deployment of personnel taken from outside the damage control organisation to reinforce DC parties, in cluding Warfare personnel allocated by the Command at action and spare hands during emergencies. h. Redeploying the monitoring and decont amination teams elsewhere within the DC organisation, when approved by the Command, at low NBC risks. j. Managing use of the HPSW system and coordinating its re-c onfiguration following damage. k. Acting as the interface between HQ1 and the rest of the SCC by 1 Reacting to priorities and directives from the ANBCDO.2 Keeping the ANBCDO informed of NBCD incidents and the DC organisations reaction to them. 3 Requesting priority changes or assist ance for DC parties from outside of the DC organisation, from the Command, through the ANBCDO. 4 Keeping ANBCDO informed of incidents which require coordination between the DC organisation and any self-contained NBCD Section.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-17 Change 15 Liaising with the Propulsion Manager. 6 Liaising with the DCOL.7 Liaising with the NBCPOs Assistant. l. Directing the work of the HQ1 Incident Board Operator, HQ1 panel operators and any HQ1 communication numbers or messengers. 1 Ensuring all information coming into HQ1 is properly recorded, rerouted or acted upon. 2 Ensuring any directives or priorities from the Command and the ANBCDO, and any information generated within HQ1, is passed to all outstations within theDC organisation. This includes HQ1 alarms. 3 Ensuring that a narrative of events is kept in all NBCD State 3 incidents. m. Make broadcast sitreps to the Ships Company. 0227. Command Adviser The responsibilities of the Command A dviser in the Action State are a. To determine the Commands equipment repair priorities and ensure that the appropriate outstations are aware of them a nd work to them. In consultation with the PWO, he is to recommend changes to these priorities, depending on the tactical situationand the extent and nature of any damage suffered. b. To monitor the performance of weapons sensors, communicati ons, data handling systems and all the supporting services taking into account operator, tactical and material factors. He is to assess the effects of damage, defects and degradation on the ships ability to fight, establishing estimated time back on line ETBOL and alternative modesof operation where possible. He is to keep the Command fully informed of allsignificant changes that may affect the operational ability of the ship. c. By consultation with the MEO and the XO, he is to monitor the extent of damage to the hull, propulsion and ancillary systems and the effect on the ships ability to meet the Command Aim. He is to keep the Command informed of all significant changes thatmay affect the operational capability of the ship. d. To integrate the requirements of the Wa rfare and Engineering Departments for the testing, maintenance and repair of systems and equipment within the existing tacticalscenario. He is to particularly assess the extent of damage following an attack mini-SOCs and blanket search. e. To monitor the identity, number and location of casualties and to monitor the requirement to move personnel w ithin the ship to deal with damage control, firefighting and weapon repair. He is to ensure that the Command Aim is being complied with and that the Command is fully informed of all significan t personnel matters.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-18 UK RESTRICTEDf. To liaise with the XO on 1 Domestic matters such as Action snacks, Action messing, the opening of heads, etc. 2 Explosive hazards.3 Material changes which affect the ships signature. g. Carry out the duties of Command NBC A dviser as the NBC threat dictates. 0228. Damage Control Officer Electrical DCOL The DCOL is an officer or senior rating, nominated by the MEO, He is stationed in HQ1SCC when the ship is in NBCD State 1, and his responsibilities are a. Control of the main electri cal distribution system and converted supplies, keeping the Action NBCDO informed of the current state, limitations and implications of damagerepair actions. b. Compilation of the damage picture of electrical losses gathered from feedback from L DC teams and WSB reports. c. Advising the Propulsion Manager of any electrical problems a ffecting machinery. d. Advising the DCO of any electrical problems affecting the DCFF efforts under his control eg HPSW pumps, lighting losses etc. e. Close liaison with the WSB with rega rds to power supply problems affecting weapons and sensors, together with any m echanical problems highlighted by the PM, eg chilled water, LP air or hydraulics. f. Interrogation of the main incident board for incidents that may affect integrity of power supplies or restor ation of power supplies. g. Investigation of electrical defects and instigation of emergency cable runs and electrical repairs in accordance with the Command Aim. 0229. The Propulsion Manager The Propulsion Manager PM is an officer or senior rating nominated by the MEO. He is stationed in the SCC when NBCD St ate 1 is ordered. His responsibilities are a. Supervision of the SCC watch and machinery space crews to ensure that every effort is made to maximise the power available to Command. b. Directing the actions of the Mobile Re pair Party, primarily in support of the machinery space crews. c. Coordinating the reaction to damage to the propulsion plant in accordance with the priorities set by the ANBCDO.UK RESTRICTED UK RESTRICTED 2-19 Change 2d. Maintaining a close liaison with the DCO and DCOL to ensure that the implications of fires, damage and elect rical losses on the propulsion plant are fully appreciated, and that incidents in the machinery spaces are recorded on the main incidentboard. e. Managing the reconfiguration and repair to key mechanical systems chilled water, hydraulics, HP and LP air throughout the ship. f. Informing the ANBCDO of damage and limitations affecting the propulsion plant and key mechanical systems, and providing an ETBOL s ee Para 0843 for all losses. 0230. NBC Protection Officer The NBC Protection Officer NBCPO is nor mally the DWEO, although in large ships another WE officer may be nominated by the Command. The duties of the NBCPO are a. Advising the Command, through the WE O, on all NBC Defe nce matters, ie 1 Assisting the PWO on the interpretation of NBC related intelligence.2 Assisting the Navigating OfficerPWO with the preparation and interpretation of NBC ATP 45BRACIS reports. 3 Advising the Command, through the WEO, on appropriate NBC protection measures. 4 Advising the Command, through the WEO, on monitoring and decontamination procedures. 5 Advising the Command, through the WEO, on the NBC risk-taking philosophy. b. Advising the WEO of all NBC incidents, and recommending responses and reactions to them. c. Directing the activities of the NBC Monitoring and Decontamination Teams, ie 1 Supervising the NBCPOs Assistant NBCPOA.2 Passing the Command Aim onto the NBCPOA.3 Training and exercising the NBC M onitoring and Decontamination Teams. d. Carrying out the duties of the ship s Radiation Safety Officer RSO. e. The production and amending of the NBC Protection sections of the ships NBCD Orders.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-20 UK RESTRICTED0231. NBC Protection Officers Assistant The NBCPOs Assistant NBCPOA is norma lly a WE senior ra ting who has attended the appropriate NBC course. His duties and responsibilities are a. Supporting the NBCPO in 1 Reporting NBC incidents including alarms, detection, monitoring and decontamination results. 2 Providing advice on all NBC matters.3 Keeping NBC records.4 Assisting in training the NBC M onitoring and Decontamination Teams. b. Controlling the NBC specialist teams, ie 1 The NBC Monitoring Teams.2 The NBC Decontamination Teams.3 The Cleansing Station Crews.5 The Airlock Sentries. c. Advising the Action NBCDO and DCO on NBC matters.d. Controlling the custody and maintenance of NBC detection and monitoring equipment for which he is responsible. 0232. NBC Defence Watch Coordinator During prolonged periods of operation under NB C threat, particularly after the ship has been contaminated by fall-out or chemical agents, there is a need to establish a liaison linkbetween the PWO and the cleansing station team. This is best achieved by employment in HQ1 of the NBCPOA andor another su itably briefed senior rating at all times when personnel on the upper deck are being watch-changed and need to be check monitored and or processed through the cleansing stations before re-entry into the citadel. It is most important that effective controlof incoming RAS parties and off-going upper d eck crews is achieved, to ensure a smooth throughput at the cleansing stations, or check monitor air lock. A waste of man-hours and loss of morale can result from lengthy processing at the end of an evoluti on or a standard watch change. Following contamination on the upper dec k, careful thought must be given to the rate at which personnel are relieved of their upper deck duties. A knowledge of NBC monitoring and cleansing techniques will enhan ce the performance of the personne l fulfilling this defence watch NBC coordination commitment.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-21 Change 30233. Meteorological Officer The Meteorological Officer or the officer performing these duties is responsible for advising the Command on meteorological factor s affecting NBC protection, and on the suitability of weather conditions for the us e by the enemy of biological and chemical weapons. After a nuclear, biological or chemical weapon release the Meteorol ogical Officer, in conjunction with the Navigating Officer and the NBCPO, is to assist in estimating the areas of sea and aircontamination. 0234. NBCD Responsibilities in Minewarfare and Patrol Vessels MMPPs Due to the manning levels in MMPPs, th e standard responsibilities of the Executive Officer and the Marine Engineer Officer cannot be fully applied. The following guidance is to be followed a. In MMPPs where the MEO is a Senior Rating, the XO is to assume full responsibility for NBCD and is to act as the Ac tion NBCDO. He is to be assisted by the MEO as the senior technical adviser, and is to close up in HQ1 whenever the ship goesto Action or Emergency Stations. b. The NBCD qualified rating NBCDQ in a MMPP is responsible for all NBCD stores and the implementation of firefighting and damage control trai ning policy. He is accountable to the MEO for the material st ate of firefighting and damage control equipment, and to the WEO for the material state of NBC equipment. c. The NBC Protection Officer NBCPO in a MMPP is the Senior WE Rating onboard WEO. The NBC protection organisa tion is to be directed by WEO from HQ1. He does not have an NBCPOs Assistant. 0235. NBCD Training Organisation The organisation for NBCD training in a ship is illustrated at Fig 2-1.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 2-22 UK RESTRICTED Fig 2-1. NBCD Training ResponsibilitiesUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-1 Change 2CHAPTER 3 LOCATION AND IDENTIFICATION MARKINGS CONTENTS Para L o c a t i o n M a r k i n g s ................................................... 0301 B a s i s o f t h e S y s t e m .................................................. 0302 C o m p a r t m e n t s a n d O p e n i n g s........................................... 0303 D e c k s ............................................................. 0304 Subdivision Fore and Aft .............................................. 0305 Subdivision Athwartships ............................................. 0307 W a t e r t i g h t C o m p a r t m e n t s w i t h i n A n o t h e r................................. 0308 Compartments Extending Beyond a Main Section .......................... 0309 C o m p a r t m e n t s M o r e t h a n O n e D e c k H i g h ................................ 0310 N o m e n c l a t u r e o f C o m p a r t m e n t s ........................................ 0311 D o o r s ............................................................. 0312 H a t c h e s............................................................ 0313 Manholes .......................................................... 0314 Trunks ............................................................ 0315 D r a w i n g s .......................................................... 0316 Ventilation Systems .................................................. 0317 F a n S t a r t e r s ........................................................ 0318 S e a - c o c k s .......................................................... 0319 Method of Marking .................................................. 0320 S t a t i o n N u m b e r s..................................................... 0321 O t h e r S i d e M a r k i n g s ................................................. 0322 C o m p a r t m e n t s B e l o w M a r k i n g s ........................................ 0323 C o n t e n t s C i r c l e s..................................................... 0324 S u c t i o n S t r a i n e r s .................................................... 0325 D e c k T u b e s ........................................................ 0326 T r a f f i c R o u t e s ...................................................... 0327 First Aid Posts and Secondary Medical Positions ........................... 0328 C l e a n s i n g P o s t s ..................................................... 0329 P i p e S y s t e m s ....................................................... 0330 E s c a p e M a r k i n g s .................................................... 0331 Important Valves and Fittings .......................................... 0332 H P S W S y s t e m V a l v e M a r k i n g ......................................... 0333 E l e c t r i c a l S y s t e m M a r k i n g s ............................................ 0334 N B C D Z o n e M a r k i n g................................................. 0335 Upper Deck Markings for MMS Boundary Cooling ......................... 0336 BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-3 OriginalCHAPTER 3 LOCATION AND IDENTIFICATION MARKINGS 0301. Location Markings The Royal Navy and Royal Fleet Auxiliary location marking system consists of a series of numbers and letters displayed on bulkheads, doors, hatches and othe r fittings to indicate positions in a ship. 0302. Basis of the System Decks divide the ship horizontally and main transverse bulkheads divide the ship into main sections. Minor transverse bulkheads furt her divide these main sections. Longitudinal fore and aft bulkheads also divide the main sections. For convenience, a main transverse bulkhead and hence a main section is assumed to continue upwards to the top of the structure even though it may actually finish at a lower d eck. Similarly, deck levels are in most cases assumed to be continuous throughout the ship. 0303. Compartments and Openings The basic unit of the location marking system is the COMPARTMENT. Doors, hatches, manholes etc. are then identified by the location of the compartment in which they are located, or to which they give access. The position, and hence the marking of a compartment, is defined by a combination of figures and letters a.Vertical Component. A large FIGURE number for the deck on which the compartment is located. b.Horizontal Components 1 A large capital LETTER indicating the main transverse subdivision. 2 If needed, a suffix LETTER small cap itals indicating its position, forward or aft, within the main transverse subdivision. 3 If needed, a small FIGURE indicating the athwartships position in relation to the centre line. 0304. Decks Decks are numbered consecutively downward to the outer bottom, starting with the forecastle deck as 1 Deck. In aircraft carriers eg CVS or LPH, 1 Deck is the flight deck. Decksabove 1 deck are numbered 01, 02 and so on consecutively upwards see Fig 3-1. 0305. Subdivision Fore and Aft The main sections formed by the main transverse watertight bulkheads are lettered, A, B, C and so on, from forward to aft. The letters I and O are omitted to avoid confusion with deck numbers.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-4 UK RESTRICTED Fig 3-1. Decks and Main Sections in a CVS Fig 3-2. CompartmentsUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-5 Original0306. Watertight compartments formed by transverse bulkheads within the main sections are given suffixes A, B or C, starting from forward, or Z, Y or X starting from aft, as well as the marking of the main section. In the case of an odd number of watertig ht compartments within a main section, precedence in the suffix letter is given to the top end of the alphabet eg ABC YZ AB Z ABCD XYZ. Note. These suffix letters are capitals, but sma ller than the main section letters and deck figures see Fig 3-2. 0307. Subdivision Athwartships Where fore and aft bulkheads divide a main section, forming a number of watertight compartments abreast, small figures are used after the deck number and section letter or letters 1, 3, 5, 7 and so on to indicate compartments to starboard of the centre line and 2, 4, 6, 8 for those to port of the centre line, in each case numbering outwards from the centre line. Compartmentson the centre line are numbered 0 see Fig 3-2. 0308. Watertight Compartments within Another When one watertight compartment is contained within another, its marking is that of the larger one, with the addition of -00. If more compartments than one are contained, they are marked -100 and -300 outwards from the centre line if they are on the starboard side of the ship or -200 and -400 if on the port side, eg 8D A-100 and 8D A-200 see Fig 3-3. 0309. Compartments Extending Beyond a Main Section Where compartments extend beyond one main sec tion, they bear the letter of the section in which they are mainly situated this may occur anywhere but is most common on decks above the main watertight subdivision, eg in Fig 3- 1, the space on 01 deck running above G and most of H sections will be marked 01H. In aircraft carriers, this system is generally applied tocompartments on the upper hangar and gallery d ecks the section boundari es are considered as being extended up to 1 deck. 0310. Compartments More than One Deck High A compartment more than one deck high is marked according to the deck on which it stands eg in Fig 3-1, the lowest co mpartment in C section would be 10C. 0311. Nomenclature of Compartments Since every watertight compartment is give n a marking by this system, and some non- watertight spaces, it is conveni ent and desirable to refer to many compartments by the deck number and section lette r rather than by any arbitrary number eg 5C Plant and Pump Space 4M Aft Auxiliary Machinery Space 4K General Service Pump 2N 2Dining Hall Fuel tanks can also be identified in this way but with the addition, if required, of a number denoting the position of the tank within the sec tion, from forward to aft, odd to starboard and even to port, eg 6M 2 Dieso tank, 7H 1 Avcat tank. In multi-unit ships such as CVS, it is often more convenient to identify the tanks by a marking which indicates the unit, eg A 3 Dieso tank, but the tank would also bear its location marking which might be 11L A2. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-6 UK RESTRICTED0312. Doors In general, a door bears the marking of the compartment to which it gives access. Where two or more doors give access to one compartment they are distinguished by the words PORT or STARBOARD andor FORWARD or AFT in abbreviated form after the marking. In rarecases of doubt as to which of two adjacent co mpartments should govern the door marking, the marking of the compartment in which the door is hinged should be used see Fig 3-4. Doors that pierce main athwartship bulkheads, separating lettered sections of th e ship, are designated by the deck number followed by the letters of the tw o section in alphabetical order, eg 3DE. 0313. Hatches A hatch bears the number of the deck in wh ich it is cut followed by the horizontal co- ordinates of the compartment to which it gives access, eg hatch 5D Y giving access to compartment 6D Y see Fig 3-4. Where two or more hatches, cut in the same deck, give access to the same compartment they are distinguished by the words PORT or STARBOARD andorFORWARD or AFT, in abbreviated form, after the marking. Note. Escape manholes or scuttles do not bear location markings. 0314. Manholes A manhole with a bolted or otherwise fixed cover bears the marking of the compartment to which it give access, since this may be from the deck above or through a bulkhead. A manhole in a hatch is not marked but is referred to as Manhole in hatch, followe d by the marking of the hatch in which it is cut. 0315. Trunks A trunk is marked with the deck number of the top hatch or door and the deck number and compartment letters of the lowest compartment to which th e trunk leads. This applies to the whole trunk and is shown in each se parate watertight part eg trunk 58D A in Fig 3-3. Each hatch in the trunk, and any inte rmediate access door, is marked with its own deck number and with the deck number and compartment letters of the bottom of the trunk eg hatch 58D A in Figs 3-3 and 3-4. In addition, the word TR UNK is marked on the top hatch or door and each intermediate one. 0316. Drawings On drawings only, the markings of doors, hatches and manholes ar e prefixed by code letters D, H and M, respectively, but these lette rs are not included in the actual markings onboard.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-7 Original Fig 3-3. Compartments - Plan and Section - Showing Trunk Fig 3-4. Doors and HatchesBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-8 UK RESTRICTED0317. Ventilation Systems a. Each ventilation system is marked by a number, a large capital letter and a two- figure number. The first number is the numbe r of the deck on which the fan is located, the large capital letter donates th e main watertight section containing the fan, and the two-figure number indicates the position of th e fan in that main watertight section, eg 11 is the first fan on the starboard side, 13 the second on the starboard side, 12 the first on the port side, 14 the second on the port si de and so on. The two-figure number is used to prevent confusion with deck numbering. The explanation of ventilation system3C11 is that it is supplied by a fan situated at the starboard forward end of C section on 3 deck. The whole system t erminals, closures, flaps, va lves and trunking carries the fan marking, with tallies fitted as follows 1 At each system component, eg terminal flaps, fan, fan starter, valves, heaters, fire flaps, grease filters, etc. 2 On trunking serving a compartment , including recirculation trunking. 3 On trunking passing through an unlined compartment.4 At intervals along a trunk within a specific compartment where passing services or complexity of vent systems results in the identification of the systembeing difficult, eg main machinery spaces supply, air-conditioning supply to messdecks. 5 In lined compartments, on portable access panels to vent heaters, valves, etc, in lieu of a tally on the component. 6 Tallies are not required on trunking in cabins, nor on trunking in a compartment where a component is identified subject to 4 above. 7 Ventilation flaps to Main Machiner y Spaces have an additional sign CLOSE IN THE EVENT OF FIRE IN ........ name of compartments painted or tallied on both side s of the flaps to enable personnel to quickly identify which flaps need closing in the event of a fire. b. The above markings are in addition to an y NBCD risk and control markings on the system and fittings. In group ventilation syst ems, a subsidiary run from the main system is marked as a separate sy stem if it contains a booster fan. Lengths of trunking and bulkhead flaps provided to promote recircula tion but not related to specific ATUs are also to be treated as separate systems and marked accordingly. A natural system inwhich no fan is fitted, is treated as if there were a fan in the compartment served and ismarked accordingly.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-9 Change 3g60c. The location and system identification in abbreviated form of all main machineryspace fan starters, closures and flaps are to be clearly marked in white figures and letterson a red background at their control position a nd outside the compartment in which they are located, eg 01H14 GTR SUP. Ventilation controls are not to be located incompartments which are normally required to be locked. d. The location and system identification of a ll other fan starters are also to be clearly marked at their control position. The system identification is to be in abbreviated form and where grouped compartments are involved, should be restricted to the principle function, eg 2E13 MAG SUP or 2J16 No 4 ATU. Tallies for galley and machineryspace fan starters are to be clearly marked in white figures and letters on a redbackground. Other fan starter tallies are to be marked in black figures and letters as for standard location markings see Para 0320. e. All other ventilation outlets, including free breathing ventilation systems, eg diesel crankcase breathers, are to be marked with the system of origin in abbreviated form.Where grouped compartments are involved the marking is to be restricted to the principle function of the ventilation system. 0318 Fan Starters If the starter is remote from the fan, the position of the starter is indicated at the fan. a. If the starter is in the same watertight section as the fan, the sign is marked on the fan casing in the following form STARTER 3 METRES b. If the starter is not in th e same watertight section, the exact location of the starter is indicated on the fan casing, eg STARTER AT 3C, 52S 0319. Sea-cocks Sea-cocks and their controlling mechanisms are marked by the deck number and main section letter of the compartment in which the sea-cock is fitted, followed by PORT orSTARBOARD andor FORWARD or AFT, if there are two on the same deck and within thesame section. The only sea-cocks marked are thos e that admit water into the hull, either directly or through additional valves, eg floods to maga zines. Those that admit water into a closed system, eg pump suctions, are not marked. 0320. Method of Marking Markings are generally in the form of embossed aluminium tallies, applied with an impact adhesive. Letters and figures on the embossed tallies are painted black with thebackground the same colour as the surface on whic h they are located, except for galley and main machinery space ventilation system tallies as refe rred in para 0317 c and d. The size of tallies is as followsBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-10 UK RESTRICTEDa.In compartments. 75mm figures and capital letters for the deck number and section letter, and 50mm capital letters and figures for the remainder. The tallies areplaced so that they are visible from all entrances to the compartment, more than one tallybeing used if necessary. b.Doors, Hatches, Manholes and Sea-cocks. 25mm figures and capital letters for the deck number and section letter, and 20mm capital letters and figures for theremainder. The words PORT, AFT and so on, when needed, are in 25mm capital letters. Doors and hatches are marked on both sides, doors near the upper corner of the hinged edge. c.Ventilation Fans, Systems and Fittings. 25mm figures and capital letters for the deck number and section letter, 20mm capital letters for the remainder. Fan starters are also to be marked SUPPLY or EXHAUST in 20mm capitals. 0321. Station Numbers A station number is a means of locating a position in a ship in relation to the nearest transverse frame, eg when reporting the position of an incident of damage to authorities holdingdrawings of the ship, or for other technical pur poses. Frame stations are numbered consecutively from forward to aft, Station 0 being the forwar d perpendicular. This numbering system is reversed in ships built to merchant ship standards, where the numbers run from aft to forward.A main transverse bulkhead is marked, in a conspicuous position on the bulkhead at each deck level, with the number of the frame at which it is fitted see Table 3-1. 0322. Other Side Markings These are applied to certain bulkheads to indicate the type of compartment on the other side and hence its contents a.In DDFF and Smaller Ships. On bulkheads forming the perimeters of dangerous compartments, namely magazines, machinery spaces, paint and flammable stores. b.In Larger Ships. On all main transverse and longitudinal watertight bulkheads below the lowest communication deck, on bul kheads of dangerous compartments as for smaller ship. c. The markings consist of the name of the compartment followed by the underlined letters OS see Table 3-1. Note. A communication deck is one on which fore and aft movement through the ship is freely possible. 0323. Compartments Below Markings These indicate the names of compartments to which a hatchway gives access and are generally painted on a nearby bulkhead above the hatch, egUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-11 Change 1 Compts below SRE compartment TV studioAC machinery compt.Sewage plant 0324. Contents Circles These indicate, within the Red Risk Zone see Chapter 5, the number and types of all openings within a watertight co mpartment or group of compartme nts to which a watertight door or hatch gives access, for the guidance of personne l responsible for shutting them. Self-evident letters are used, eg Only valves or closures which affect flooding boundaries eg scuppers ar e indicated, not system operating valves. An O after a V or M indicates that the operating mechanism eg handwheelis outside the compartment. An arrow on the contents circle indicates that it refers to thecompartment to which the arrow points. These mark ings are available as transfer waterslides and are listed in BR 21703. 0325. Suction Strainers The position of a suction strainer is indicated by the letter S enclosed in a square, high up on the bulkhead, with an arrow pointing towards the strainer. This is to enable repair parties,in a flooded compartment being pumped, to lo cate a strainer that has become choked. 0326. Deck Tubes a. Deck tubes for the passage of emergency cables from one deck to another are indicated by a green cross on the white-painted cap of the deck tube. b. Foam tubes for machinery space firefighting are painted red. Adjacent signs, with white lettering on a red background, are to indicate the use of foam tubes. 0327. Traffic Routes Where necessary or desirable, black arrows are used to indicate routes in passageways or through doors or hatches. 0328. First Aid Posts and Secondary Medical Positions First Aid Posts and Secondary Medical Pos itions are indicated by a white cross on a green background, an arrow being added where nece ssary to indicate direction. The designation of the F.A.P., eg its number or section letter, or forwardaft, may be added if required.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-12 UK RESTRICTED0329. Cleansing Posts Cleansing posts are indicated by the words CLEANSING POST in orange, an arrow being added where necessary to i ndicate direction. The cleansing post locker is to be painted white with an orange, upright, cross. 0330. Pipe Systems Pipe systems, together with ventilation systems and rod gearing, are to be identified with self-adhesive tapes or pa ints, as specified in BR 21703. Where an identifying system colour is not specified they are to be painte d in the colour of the background surface. 0331. Escape Markings In all cases, escape routes are to be clearly marked, using the signs listed in BR 21703. These markings are not to be obscured by any doors in the open position. a.Escape Routes. These are to be marked by 1 Photoluminescent arrows applied at prominent positions high on bulkheads adjacent to all hatches except where only a single route is possible, to indicate thedirection of escape. Arrows are also to be applied at intermediate positions on bulkheads in lobbies and passageways leadin g to the point of escape, particularly when changes of direction occur. Thes e arrows are to be positioned at a nominal height of 1.5 metres above the deck in order to remain visible in the event of flooding. 2 Deck mounted arrow dot markers ar e to be positioned in the centre of passageways adjacent to high level bulkhead mounted markings. 3 In large ships, in large compartment s with multiple doors, the escape route door is to be painted emerald green. b.Escape Recess Markings. These markings are to be applied to ships where this type of escape is provided in way of aircra ft or ammunition lifts. Escape recesses are to be indicated by the application of a phot oluminescent ESCAPE marking at prominent positions, on bulkheads, within the recess. c.Escape Hatches and Scuttles 1 Normally emergency escape hatches and scuttles are painted green on both sides. However, the escape side of hatc hes sighted on ships weather decks are to be painted in the appropriate deck covering material and the escape side of scuttleson ships screens are to be painted in accordance with the ships overall paintscheme. 2 In all cases the presence of escape hatches and scuttles must be clearly indicated on adjacent structure in the compartment from which escape is intendedto be made, by the application of a photoluminescent ESCAPE marking on a greenUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-13 Change 3background. A photoluminescent arrow marking on a green background is to be added adjacent to the ESCAPE marking to indicate the direction of escape. Theword ESCAPE may also be painted di rectly on the emergency escape hatch or scuttle in 40mm white lette rs, in addition to the photoluminescent markings on adjacent structure, where this is consider ed more practical to indicate its position. 3 With the exception of those which open onto the upper deck, escape hatches which can be open from the non-escape side by means of a T handle are to havethese T handles painted in a combinati on of photoluminescent paint on the centre bar and emerald green on all other parts. Details of the paint are in BR 21703. 0332. Important Valves and Fittings Thixotropic photoluminescent paint is used to highlight the position of the following important valves and fittings a. High pressure sea water system main isolating valves.b. High and low pressure air machinery space bulkhead isolating valves.c. BA Charging panel isolating valves.d. Hydraulic system main isolating valves.e. Remote diesel engine stops. f. Remote fuel stops to auxiliary boilers. g. The fully CLOSED position on Leith Cardle WT door handles. h. Operating levershandwheels on the underside of escape scuttles. 0333. HPSW System Valve Marking Valves and hydrants in the high pressure sea water HPSW system are marked numerically to assist rapid identification for damage control and firefighting. The markingsystem is applied to surface warships and RFAs as follows a. The marking of valves and hydrants involves the complete HPSW main but excludes all other parts of the system ie sprays, cooling and domestic lines etc. b. Numbering of the main isolating valves begins on the isolating valve closest to the end of the ring main on the forward most spur with the isolating valves numbered consecutively from forward to aft along the ship. Where a spur meets a ring main, theconventional NBCD numbering of even num bers to the port side and odd numbers to starboard is used, counting from the last number on the spur. When the spur is in themiddle of a port or starboard leg, the numberi ng of the ring main recommences from the last number on the spur. This means that two adjacent isolating valves may not haveconsecutive numbers.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-14 UK RESTRICTED c. Numbers are only repeated when the main system exists on more than one deck, an example being a CVS. In this instance isol ating valves on the higher and lower rings will have either a suffix H or L. Whether at the end of, or in the middle of a port orstarboard leg the numbering of the va lves is to be from forward to aft. d. All hydrants are numbered with the numbers of the isolating valves either side of the hydrant take-off the lower number is fi rst and the higher num ber is separated with a dash. When the hydrant is supplied from a lower or higher ring main the two numbers are followed by the relevant suffix eg 18-20L. Where more than one hydrant is supplied from the main between the same two isolating valves, they are to have exactly the samenumber. This defines exactly which hydran ts are unavailable when the isolating valves are closed. Fig 3-5 shows a typical arrangement, identifying each valve. e. The actual marking of the isolating valves is included on the Main Systems Board in HQ1 and AHQ HQ2 and FRPPs as appropria te. Black indelible markings are used. f. Marking numbers are applied as follows, using luminous red se lf adhesive tape 1 Isolating Valves. 25mm black numbers on a 75mm square red background on, or close to, the valve. 2 Hydrants. 12mm black numbers on a 50mm square red background, on the boss of the instantaneous coupling. Fig 3-5. HPSW System - Valve MarkingUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-15 Change 2 0334. Electrical System Markings Electrical system markings are detailed in BR 200052 - Electrical Power Distribution and Utilization. 0335. NBCD Zone Marking NBCD zones are numbered from forward to aft. They are marked, numerically, on NBCD drawings, but the bulkheads which separa te zones are only marked by the words ZONE BOUNDARY. 0336. Upper Deck Markings for MMS Boundary Cooling Markings, as shown in Table 3-1, are applied to the inboard edge of the upper deck or adjacent superstructure to aid MMS boundary cooling operations. The marking in black consists of a line indicating the position of th e transverse bulkhead, with an arrow pointing forwardaft from the bulkhead line in the direction of the MMS compartment. Below this arrow is the space name in 50 mm italic letters. The line indicating the MMS limit is 150 mm long and 15 mm wide and the arrow line is 70 mm long. Wh ere the marking is on superstructure, it should start 100 mm above the deck. Where a transverse bulkhead separates two machinery spaces, the marking should indicate both spaces. Table 3-1. Summary of Markings EXAMPLE APPLICATION COMPARTMENTS 2B A3 indicates a compartment on 2 deck that is situated at the fore end of B sectionand is the second compartment tostarboard of the centreline 2B A3-00 indicates a watertight compartment within compartment 2B A3IN A POSITION THAT CAN BE SEENFROM ALL ENTRANCESFIRST DECK. Numbered 1, 2, 3, etc.FIGURE downwards from focsle or flight deck, and 01, 02, etc,upwards. SECOND SECTION. ie MainLETTER compartment between main transverse bulkheads, lettered A,B, C, etc not I or O fromforward to aft. THIRD Fore and aft position ofLETTER compartment within section. Lettered A, B, etc, from forwardZ, Y, etc, from aft. FOURTH Athwartships position ofFIGURE compartment from centreline, 1, 3, etc, to starboard, 2, 4 to port. Centreline compartment, 0. SUFFIX Watertight compartmentFIGURES contained in another. Suffix -00. -100 or -200, etc, where two ormore contained compartments,odd to starboard, even to port.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-16 UK RESTRICTEDTable 3-1. Summary of Markings continued EXAMPLE APPLICATION DOORS 2PB door giving access to compartment 2PB 2DE door connecting D and E sections on 2 deckBOTH SIDES, UPPER CORNER OR HINGED EDGEDoors bears marking of compartment towhich it gives access. If two doors giveaccess to same compartment, marking isqualified by PORTSTBD or FWDAFT. Doors in main transverse bulkheadsseparating lettered sec tion have deck number and letters of both s ections in alphabetical order. HATCHES 2D A1 hatch on 2 deck giving access to compartment on 3 deck that hashorizontal co-ordinates D A1NEAR CORNER ON HINGED SIDE. FIRST FIGURE - DECK IN WHICHHATCH IS CUTRemaining letters and figu res give fore and aft and athwartships position of compartment towhich hatch gives access. Where two hatches give access to same compartment, markingsqualified by PORTSTBD or FWDAFT. MANHOLES fixed 6G Z4 manhole gives access to 6G Z4Marking of compartment to which manholegives access. A manhole in a hatch is notmarked by referred to as manhole in hatch ... TRUNKS 15D A Trunk running from 1 deck down to compartment 5D AMARKED ON EACH SEPARATESECTION OF TRUNKTrunk carries deck number of top hatch ordoor, plus marking of compartment at bottomof trunk. Each hatch in trunk, and anyintermediate door, has its own deck number plus marking of compartment at bottom oftrunk. Word TRUNK on all hatches anddoors giving access to trunk. STATION NUMBER 17 indicates a main transverse bulkhead at the seventeenth frame station from theforemost frameFrame stations at main transverse bulkheads, as needed in conspicuous position onbulkheads. OTHER SIDE MARKING MAGAZINE OS On bulkheads forming perimeter of dangerouscompartments, eg magazines, machineryspaces, flammable stores. Also, in multiplesection ships, on main bulkheads belowlowest communication deck. COMPARTMENTS BELOW As needed above a hatchway to indicate compartments gained thereby. Instead of theheading Compts. below, an arrow can beused if desired.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-17 Change 2 Table 3-1. Summary of Markings continued EXAMPLE APPLICATION VENTILATION SYSTEMS 3C11 system with fan at starboard forward end of C section on 3 deckOn vent trunking, at regular intervals. Temperature Monitoring Signs High risk fire compartments external boundaries see Annex 21B for illustration CONTENTS CIRCLES WITHOUT ARROW - indicates number and types of openings in that compartment. WITH ARROW indicates number and types of openings in compartment to which arrowpoints. H hatch D Door V ventilation valve M miscellaneous openings. o after V orM indicates that opening mechanism isoutside the compartment. STRAINERS Placed high on bulkhead with arrow pointing to position of strainer. DECK TUBES On caps of deck tubes for flexible emergency electrical cables. TRAFFIC ROUTESWhere needed in passages or through doors or hatches. FIRST AID POSTS To mark FAP or SMP. A white arrow on a green background may be used to indicate direction. Table 3-1. Summary of Markings continuedBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 3-18 UK RESTRICTEDEXAMPLE APPLICATION CLEANSING POSTS To mark cleansing post, with orange arrow where needed. ESCAPE ROUTES On escape routes, recesses, hatches and scuttles. HPSW SYSTEM On HPSW isolating valves and hydrants. NBCD ZONES ZONE BOUNDARYOn bulkheads which separate NBCD zones. SHELTER ROUTE Alongside doorshatche s on shelter routes MMS BOUNDARY COOLING On deck edge or superstructure to indicate forwardaft limits of machinery spaces. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-1 Change 2CHAPTER 4 NBCD STATES OF READINESS CONTENTS Para N e e d f o r N B C D S t a t e s o f R e a d i n e s s ..................................... 0402 A s p e c t s G o v e r n e d b y N B C D S t a t e s...................................... 0403 T y p i c a l A r r a n g e m e n t s ................................................ 0404 D e f i n i t i o n o f N B C D S t a t e s ............................................ 0405 P r e p a r a t i o n o f S t a t e s o f R e a d i n e s s....................................... 0406 Responsibility for Setting the State ...................................... 0407 C h o i c e o f S t a t e...................................................... 0408 Peacetime Navigational Hazards ........................................ 0409 S p e c i a l S e a D u t y m e n ................................................. 0410 A s s u m i n g S t a t e 2 .................................................... 0411 Assuming the Gastight Condition ....................................... 0412 E x e r c i s e s .......................................................... 0413 M a n n i n g f o r N B C D S t a t e 1 ............................................ 0414 M a n n i n g f o r N B C D S t a t e 2 ............................................ 0415 M a n n i n g f o r N B C D S t a t e 3 ............................................ 0416 M a t e r i a l C o n d i t i o n o f a S h i p ........................................... 0417 P u m p S u c t i o n s ...................................................... 0418 S t o r e s a n d E q u i p m e n t ................................................ 0419 A c c e s s t o C o m p a r t m e n t s .............................................. 0420 Accessiblity of Ships Side and Bulkheads ................................ 0421 S e c u r i t y o f M a g a z i n e s ................................................ 0422 H a t c h G u a r d r a i l s .................................................... 0423 S h i p s C o m p a n y C l o t h i n g ............................................. 0424 A c t i o n C a r r y B a g s ................................................... 0425 BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED UK RESTRICTED 4-3 Change 1CHAPTER 4 NBCD STATES OF READINESS 0401. At all times ships must be prepared to limit the extent of damage and to minimise the effects when it occurs. This preparedness befo re damage is provided by the NBCD states of readiness, and by wate rtight and gastight conditions see Chapter 5. 0402. Need for NBCD State of Readiness At all times there must be some means of ensuring the highest state of ship preparedness compatible with fighting efficiency, habitability, routine and maintenance of structure, machineryand services. It is also necessary that manpower and materials to carry out effectivecountermeasures are readily ava ilable in sufficient numbers and quantity to meet the calculated risk of damage. NBCD states of readiness are designed to ensure that NBCD manningrequirements are met and material arrangements provided in varying degr ees appropriate to the threat of attack or risk of damage. Since there is always some element of risk, there is always aneed for some state of readiness to be in force. Obviously, maintaining the highest state is thebest way to limit and control damage. However, the measures which this state imposes takepersonnel from their normal tasks and adversely affect habitab ility, routine and maintenance of the ship, its machinery and services. The hi ghest state, therefore, cannot be maintained indefinitely and ships have to adopt a state of readiness which will afford reasonable habitability and as much opportunity as possible for norma l routine and maintena nce, at the same time permitting the highest state to be assumed before the risk of damage becomes imminent. Thestate adopted must thus depend on a. The calculated risk of damage.b. The expected warning of attack.c. The speed with which the highest state can be assumed. 0403. Aspects Governed by NBCD States NBCD states of readiness govern NBCD ma nning requirements, machinery and material preparations, and arrangements to limit and control damage, except a. Preservation of watertight and gastight integrity, the Conditions for which are described in Chapter 5. b. The special needs in manning, machinery and material to meet solely the NBC threat. This threat exists only in certain situations where the enemy has an NBCcapability and conditions are suitable for its use. These requirements are therefore governed by the gastight condition and not by a state of readiness. 0404. Typical Arrangements Typical arrangements governed by NBCD states of readiness include a. Control and operation of machinery.b. Operation of HP sea water systems and other services.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-4 UK RESTRICTEDc. The spraying and flooding, if appli cable of certain high risk areas. d. Operation, distribution and isolati on of electrical power and services. e. Availability and stowage of NBCD stores and equipment.f. Security of and access to locked compartments locks and keys.g. Operation of galleys.h. Organisation of the Secondary Medical Position, Sickbay and first Aid Posts. i. Securing of stores and gear in other pl aces including personal gear to minimize the risk of damage, pump su ction chokage and fire. j. Measures to protect the i ndividual against the effects of damage, eg clothing, anti- flash gear, life-jackets. k. NBCD manning requirements. 0405. Definition of NBCD States There are three states of readiness, designed to meet all possible situations. These states provide a uniform framework throughout the Su rface Flotilla into which each ship must build its own organisation, being guided by the principles outlined in this chapter and by the typicalarrangements given in Table 4-1. Classes of ships and even ships within a Class, differ considerably and it is not possible to define manning, material and m achinery arrangements to meet the needs of all ships. Therefore, the arrangements given in Table 4-1 are for guidanceonly. The NBCD states of r eadiness are defined as follows STATE 1 Attack or damage imminent.Highest state of NBCD preparedness compatible with fighting efficiency. Disregards habitability and wear andtear of machinery. All NBCD positions fully manned, withNBCD personnel relaxed for meal s, etc, as ordered by the Command. STATE 2 Attack or damage possible.Normal war cruising and har bour state. Skeleton watch system with personnel dr awn from all departments. STATE 3 Attack or damage unlikely withoutadequate warning.Normal peacetime cruising and harbour state. Large ships provide skeleton watch system as for State 2. Small ships, no NBCD manning except for the SCC watchkeeper ifapplicable and patrols. In harbour, maximum possible habitability, routine and maintenance. Notes 1. NBCD states of readiness do not necessar ily coincide with armament degrees of readiness. Although NBCD State 1 is always assumed when the armament goes to the first degree of readiness Action Stations, the converse is not necessarily true, eg when operating in a mine threat area.UK RESTRICTED UK RESTRICTED 4-5 Change 12. States and conditions can be altered indepe ndently of each other, but when changing one or the other it is advisable to mention both. For instance, when changing from State 2, Condition Yankee to State 3, Condition Yankee, the order should be ASSUME NBCD STATE 3, CONDITION YANKEE. 3. The three States defined above refer only to surface ships. Submarines have four NBCD States see BR 21704. 0406. Preparation of States of Readiness Deciding the material conditions of the ship and the organisation of the personnel needed to achieve the different states of readiness is the responsibility of the Executive OfficerNBCDO, who must work in accord with the Heads of De partments concerned. He should consider first the highest state when all safeguards have been applied, since these will affect all departmentsof the ship to a greater or lesser degree. The relaxations from this state that can be permitted inthe lower states should then be considered. Wh en the organisation for all states has then been decided for the ship as a whole, Heads of Departments must formulate the organisation for eachstate in their departments for example, the Marine Engineer Officer will draw up orders for theworking of machinery. 0407. Responsibility for Setting the State When ships are in company, the Officer in Tactical Command OTC is responsible for ordering the NBCD state of readiness that is to be set. However, in a high threat situation inwartime, the Command should not wait for such an order if to do so would prejudice the achievement of a higher state in time to meet the threat and the Rules of Engagement permit. Atall other times the responsib ility rests with the Commanding Officer of the ship. 0408. Choice of State The following points must be considered before deciding the state of readiness to be set a. In war, NBCD State 2 is normal at sea a nd in harbour except for the relatively short periods when State 1 will be necessary. b. In peace, the assumption of State 2 or State 1 will rarely be needed, except when ordered for exercise purposes. c. At any time, the NBCD state of readine ss assumed should be no higher than that needed to accomplish the task and safeguard the ship in the particular circumstances. 0409. Peacetime Navigational Hazards Most peacetime navigational hazards eg fog, gale, narrow waters, RAS, entering and leaving harbour are usually of relatively short duration and the full assumption of State 2, with all that it entails, could not be justified, but there should be no question of assuming a degraded State 2 ie not carrying out all the measures implicit in assuming the State. It is tempting to doso in order, perhaps, to muster enough manpower to maintain watch on watertight integrity, but if this is done there will be a State 2 in peace di fferent from State 2 in war, when all the measures must be properly carried out. Thus the organisation will fall into disrepute, and if an emergencyrequires the ship to be put on a war footing, much that has been practised in peace must berelearned. A way must be found to overcome the temporary manpower difficulty or the state must be properly assume d without debasement.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-6 UK RESTRICTED0410. Special Sea Dutymen The best way of dealing with this problem is to remain in State 3 but to add to this Special Sea Dutymen, including in it any othe r special provision that seems prudent for the particular hazard. Thus for ente ring harbour in very poor visib ility, order NBCD State 3, Condition Yankee and pipe Special Sea Dutymen which should include in this instance an HQ1 watchkeeper, NBCD patrols and any material measures ordere d by the MEO eg extra pumps, isolation of systems. Ships orders should give details of the NBCD provisions for the particular hazard, over and above State 3 , required when Special Sea Du tymen are piped. Tackling the problem in the right way needs careful thought and firm but flexible organisation, but the alternative of degrading State 2 is a trap that must be avoided. If, in peacetime, it seems probable that the hazard encountered or expected will be of long duration per haps many hours or some days, the full assumption of State 2 is then a practicable step which the Command is free to takewith complete justification. 0411. Assuming State 2 It follows from the previous paragraphs th at State 2 would generally be assumed only for long periods. Common prudence dictates that when the ship must be placed on a war footing,State 1 should be assumed for a thorough check of manpower and material , and that only after this should State 2 be ordered. In peace, if a navi gational hazard is likely to be long-lasting, and the Command decides that State 2 is to be assumed, the same rou tine should generally be followed. 0412. Assuming the Gastight Condition Assuming the gastight Condition Alfa see Chapter 5 poses another problem. The superimposing of gastight Condition Alfa on watertight Condition Zulu or Yankee will, in mostinstances, require the assumption of State 1 in or der to have the manpower necessary to get all the openings and flaps set and th e citadel pressure proved. When this has been achieved State 2 Condition YA can be assumed. State 2, conditi on YA preserves the integrity of the citadel whilst allowing internal Z doors to be open for greater freedom of movement through the ship and a better air flow in the air conditioning syst em. The relaxations to Condition Alfa which the NBCD Officer can allow are dealt with in Chapter 5. 0413. Exercises During exercises of long duration in peace, ships should exercise assuming State 2 via State 1, but on no account should this be attempte d during a short exercise, lest State 1 itself becomes degraded. 0414. Manning for NBCD State 1 The Watch and Station Bill must nominate su fficient personnel to ensure prompt and effective response to all fo rms of damage and fire. To achieve this it must a. Man essential control positions.b. Provide Fire and Re pair Parties, which include teams for pumping and flooding and electrical repair. c. Provide a Mobile Repair Party, stationed adjacent to HQ1, with specialist tools eg Thermal lance, Ramset Tool and Cutting Spreading Equipment. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-7 Change 3d. Man magazine flood and spray pos itions mainly in large ships. e. In Condition Alfa, man the cleansing sta tions as required a nd provide monitoring and decontamination par ties after contamination. 0415. Manning for NBCD State 2 In NBCD State 2, personnel are required to pa rtially man certain positions to ensure the maintenance of the ordered NBCD condition of watertightgastight integrity and to enable asmooth transition to NBCD State 1 when orde red. The State 2 NBCD Command and Control organisation is covered in more detail in Chap ter 8. The following requirements are to be covered in State 2 a.Control 1 Multi-section Ships. An officer or senior ra ting and two junior ratings as assistants in HQ1. One communicati on number in each Section Base. 2 Single-section Ships. Ships with SCCs to be manned continuously by permanent watchkeepers. In other ships the OODOOW should maintain the Watertight Integrity Log. b.Patrols. Two-man patrols to maintain a c ontinuous check on the NBCD state and condition ordered. Consideration should be given to making the patrol personnel permanent watchkeepers, rotated at approximately three-month intervals. In addition tocarrying out NBCD patrols, their duty is to assist the rating in charge in HQ1SCC. c.Relaxation to Condition Alfa. One sentry to man each Alfa opening that has been opened, whilst it remains open. 0416. Manning for NBCD State 3 In State 3, NBCD requirements ar e to be covered as follows a.Control 1 Multi-section Ships. HQ1 only manned. 2 Single-section Ships. Ships with SCCs to be manned continuously by permanent watchkeepers. In other ships the OODOOW should maintain the Watertight Integrity Log. b.Patrols. As for State 2, except that in sing le-section ships patrol duties are covered by duty personnel and ratings on watch. In ships with a permanently manned SCC, some of the NBCD functions normally carried out by rounds are covered by automatic alarms and warnings displayed in the SCC a nd are monitored by the watchkeeper. Notwithstanding this, there remains a require ment for NBCD rounds to be carried out.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-8 UK RESTRICTED0417. Material Condition of a Ship The material condition of a ship is of vital importance to its NBCD preparedness. Planned maintenance sche dules take care of most of the re quirements but constant vigilance is needed for such as the following a. Ensuring the continued watertightness and gastightness of structure and fittings by regular air testing, citadel tests, making certain that holes made when equipmentespecially electric cable is moved are efficiently blanked. b. Frequent and systematic examination of all clips, rubbers, gas flaps, rod gearing, etc, to ensure that no distortion or other deterioration has taken place. c. The maintenance of location, control and risk markings. d. The systematic checking, testing and replacement as necessary of NBCD stores equipment and fittings. The amount of paint on a ships side and supers tructure should be kept to the minimum required to protect from corrosion, as unnecessary coats of paint can make a significant difference to a ships stability and too much paint also increases the smoke hazard in case of fire. It is worthyof note that fresh paint absorbs liquid chemical agent more easily than does paint that is a fewweeks old. Redundant fittings and stores of all types should always be landed. 0418. Pump Suctions The suction strainers of fi xed and portable pumps can quickly be choked by loose material left lying on decks or thrown there by shock or blast. Particularly, this applies to softmaterials, rags and paper, and to such things as paint chippings and rust scale. If a compartmentis in darkness and only partly flooded, the difficulty of clearing suction strainers needs no emphasis. Even large gratings such as those fitted to hangar scuppers can be made useless by loose rags and other gear washed against them. 0419. Stores and Equipment Storerooms and provision rooms normally have fitted stowages for their contents and keep-battens or wire mesh grills to secure th em. The stores should al ways be properly stowed with all keep-battens in place and secured. Wr apping papers and bags, cardboard cartons and sacks should not be left lying about in the stor erooms or anywhere else. In workshops, hangars, messdecks, etc, cleaning cloths s hould be kept in metal containers when not in use, or removed from the space and properly secured. Throughout th e ship, loose clothing or other materials should never be left about and lock er doors should not be left unsecured. 0420. Access to Compartments a. On assuming NBCD State 1, personnel are to ensure that non-watertight doors are secured in the open position. Exceptions are non-watertight doors cl assed as fire doors and those giving access to compartments containing highly classifiedequipmentmaterials or attractive store items.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-9 Change 2b. Compartments containing highly cla ssified equipmentsmaterials and those containing attractive stores items NAAFI st ore may be excluded if the door securing mechanisms are left unlocked. If the compartment is required to remain physicallysecure during NBCD State 1 this may be achieved by the fitting of a hasp and securingthe compartment with a soft padlock. c. Compartments containing highly classi fied material accesse d by non-watertight doors secured by combination key pads are to have their locks latched in the open position. If required, a hasp may be fitted and the compar tment secured during State 1 with a soft padlock. 0421. Accessibility of Ship s Side and Bulkheads Unless there is ready access to the ships side and to bulkheads, the efforts of repair parties, especially in leakstopping and shoring, ma y be seriously hampered . This is particularly important in storerooms and is dealt with in Chapter 12. Throughout the ship, heavy materials or equipment that are stowed near the ships side or bulkheads may prove a serious hindrance when damage andor flooding are being dealt with. Likewise, such items, if not properly secured, can shift as a result of explosion or heeling of th e ship and become wedged against the ships side or bulkheads. 0422. Security of Magazines The conditions of magazine s and ammunition lockers de pend upon the perceived threat and whether it is peace or wartime , and is decided by the Command. a.Peacetime. Normally all compartments incl uding hoists and trunks giving access and lockers in which ammunition is stowed are kept locked, and this is known as the security condition. b.Wartime. When speedy access to these compartments is likely to be necessary in order to bring the armament into action qui ckly or to take urgent NBCD action, the doorshatches to magazines ar e to be clipped but unlocked, and this is known as the Access condition. This cond ition is normally associated with NBCD States 1 and 2. When action is thought to be imminent the venting condition may be considered more appropriate. These conditions can be ordered in peacetime, fo r exercise purposes, by the Command. c. In a harbour when the ship is in NB CD State 3 the Security condition is appropriate. Notes 1. Unlocking of compartments does not imply that they may be left open. The door and other openings to magazines affected by the Access condition must conform to the particular watertight or gastight condition that the ship is in, according to theirmarkings. 2. The condition of magazines, ie Security or Access should be recorded in the Ships Explosive Log.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-10 UK RESTRICTED0423. Hatch Guardrails Hatch guardrails should be removed and stowed at Ac tion NBCD State 1, except around those hatches designated and marked O pen in Action. Additionally, they should be rigged around hatches left open as pa rt of exercise requirements, eg at OST where some hatches may be designated to be left open for staff access. If any hatches are to be left open for protracted periods then the person in charge of the area s hould consider the requireme nt to rig guardrails, taking into account the ship motion and other hazards. 0424. Ships Company Clothing Sufficient numbers of adequately protected personnel must always be available to be committed to damage control or firefighting duties in the event of any emergency being orderedeg Clear Lower Deck or Emergency Stations. Whilst this is unlikely to pose a threat intemperate climates, Commanding Officers should consider th e requirement for a number of personnel to be in flame retardant clothing wh en operating in tropical areas. Whenever the normal Dress of the Day does not give the level of protection pr ovided by the Basic Firefighting Rig see Chapter 26, Basic Firefighting Rig is to be worn or immediatel y available to be donned by the following personnel a. All personnel nominated to close up at the Scene of the Incident SOTI or at FRPPs in the event of an emergency. b. The Duty Part of the Watch in harbour.c. Personnel as nominated by departments to ensure that adequate numbers are available in the event of an emergency. 0425. Action Carry Bags The large amount of personal protective and survival equipment that may need to be carried by personnel at Action St ations or Defence Stations can be a significant encumbrance. Action Carry Bags, which are normally kept in Naval Stores, may be issued to the Ships Company, when authorised by the Command. This will enable personnel to have the items immediately at hand without w earing them about the body. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-11 Change 1Table 4-1. NBCD States of Readiness Guidance for Damage Control and Firefighting only see Chapter 5 for NBC guidance Considerations State 3 Normal peacetime state at sea and in harbour. Non action damage possible at any time State 2 Normal war state at sea and in harbour. Action possible with little warning State 1 Action state Action imminent Preparations for war None All preparations for war completed iaw BR 21701 and FCD1. Watertight condition X Y for situations of increased risk. Y Z Gastight condition None. None or A. Dress Dress of the day. but see Para 0424 As State 1 but with anti-flash hoods down, lifejackets and survival suits to hand. Full action dress iaw Chapter 26. Manning Fire and Emergency Party in harbourStanding Sea Fire Party at sea. Patrols active with SSD. SCC manned. HQ1 and FRPPs manned iaw Quarter Bill defence watch manning patrols active, HFEP SSEP detailed in each watch. Full NBCD teams closed up iaw Quarter Bill, patrols active, dispersal of personnel. Fire and repair equipment Equipment in normal stowages. FRPP lockers locked. At each FRPP dress one 4- man team in full firefighting rig, off air, communications equipment to hand. Fire and repair lockers unlocked and contents checked on completion doors should be closed and secured with a drop-nosed pin but not locked. In all states fire hoses with nozzles are to be connected to hydrants. Non watertight doors except fire doors Normal use All cabin doors and doors to unmanned compartments to be secured in the open position. Locked compartments and keys except magazines Mortice locks and padlocks locked. Duplicate keys in normal stowage. As for State 3 but duplicate keys held at FRPPs. All compartments unlocked, unmanned secure storages to be re-secured with soft padlocks only. Magazines Security condition or access condition. Access condition. Access condition. Escape ladders Secured in the useable position unless this interferes with normal access Secured in the useable position. Ramset explosive power tool Explosive charges in small arms magazine Ramset Tools to be accessible. Explosive charges to be issued to Mobile Repair Party. Thermal Lance In normal stowage. Accessible to Mobile Repair Party. Cutting Spreading Equipment In normal stowage Immediately accessible to Mobile Repair Party. Smoke Curtains Stowed Stowed Rigged, checked, then restowed Hatch Guardrails Rigged Rigged Removed and stowed, except hatches marked OPEN IN ACTION. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-12 UK RESTRICTEDTable 4-1. NBCD States of Readiness continued Considerations State 3 Normal peacetime state at sea and in harbour. Non action damage possible at any time State 2 Normal war state at sea and in harbour. Action possible with little warning State 1 Action state Action imminent High Pressure Sea Water HPSW SystemAs ordered, checked on going to sea. The system may be de-isolated to an extent dictated by the threat. In general, the number of running fire pumps should be reduced and the HPSW main isolated into the same number of sections as there are fire pumps running. main systems board is maintained. In harbour the system is run as ordered. Pump starter over- ride switches to be unlocked. 1. Divide HPSW main into as many sections as there are serviceable pumps. Run one pump to each section. 2. Ensure main and duplicate supplies to magazines are from separate sections. 3. Pump starter override switch to be closed. 4. All CFHR de-isolated Magazine floods and spraysa.Manual Systems 1 Main spray isolating valve - LOCKED OPEN. 2 Operating valve - LOCKED SHUT. b.AutomaticSemi-automatic Systems 1 Main spray and system isolating valves - LOCKED OPEN. 2 Spray shut off valve - LOCKED OPEN. a.Manual Systems 1 Main spray isolating valve - OPEN. 2 Operating valve - SHUT. b.AutomaticSemi-automatic Systems 1 Main spray isolating valve - OPEN. 2 Spray shut off valve - OPEN. Padlock opened with hasp re-inserted in the valve locking pincotter. Portable DCFF pumps less than 100 kgAvailable consistent with maintenance. Checked and tested and ready for immediate use. Mobile DCFF pumps more than 100 kg Emergency electrical equipmentEquipment secured. Equipment checked. Emergency cables ready for immediate use. Main machineryAs ordered, consistent with maintenance. Sea Full power available. harbour As ordered. Full power available. Auxiliary machineryAs ordered, consistent with maintenance. Sea As ordered. Harbour As ordered. Fresh water Normal use. Normal use. Pumps stopped. System isolated. Notes a. Before the pumps are stoppe d plastic jerry cans are to have been filled with fresh water and distributed to FAPs and SMPs. b. Pumps may be restarted at the discretion of the Command to provide essential facilities such as bridge window washing, cleansing stations and essential domestic services. HP Air Main de-isolated. Main isolated. Compressors r un as necessary but not from compartments affected by smoke Refrigeration and air conditioningOperating except as required for maintenance. Operating unmanned. Operating unmanned. Note. In Condition ALFA tested regularly for leaks by personnel in BA. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-13 Change 1Table 4-1. NBCD States of Readiness continued Considerations State 3 Normal peacetime state at sea and in harbour. Non action damage possible at any time State 2 Normal war state at sea and in harbour. Action possible with little warning State 1 Action state Action imminent Main generators Sea Sufficient running to ensure adequate power if one fails. Harbour As ordered. Sea On load as required. All other generators at immediate notice. Harbour As ordered. All generators running and supplying their own sections. High power electrical distribution system As ordered in the BR 6500 series, Main S upply System Handbook, N BCD Class Book or BR 2000 series. It is important that interconnec ting cables are isolated whenever possible and always in State 1. Emergency generators At immediate notice except during overhauls. Changeover switches All automatic COSs to be in the auto mode. Both hand a nd automatic COSs should select the Normal supplies. Converted electrical supplies Enough conversion to meet the load, consistent with maintenance. LP battery floating. Enough conversion to meet the load. LP battery floating. All conversion machinery available. LP battery floating. Hydraulic ring main Pumps running and system pressurised as required. As for State 1. De-isolated and pressurised if required for use as required by HQ1. Pumps shut down. System de-pressurised and isolated iaw system BR. Chilled water Sea As for State 2. Harbour As required. As for State 1 unless maintenance requirements dictate otherwise. All plant available. System isolated iaw system BR. Galleys, bakeries, etc Normal use. Normal use, emergency food at hand for action messing not to be used without Command approval. Shut down except as ordered for action messing. Galleys, etc. not to be used without Command approval. Action messing details in BR 93. Naval store rooms As for State 1 consistent with storing. Stowed to meet the NBCD threat see BR 4. Victualling store rooms As for State 2 consistent with storing and maintenance except stocks of RU provisions not required. As for State 1 consistent with storing. As for Naval store rooms. About 7 days provision to be stowed high in the ship consistent with stability. Secondary Medical Position SMP Unrigged. Equipment stowed in normal stowage. Equipped but unrigged, unmanned and gear stowed. Unmanned. Equipment checked and resecured. To be rigged and manned as required following triage. Sickbay Normal use. Flammable stores not required moved to the medical store. Used as medical HQ but not as FAP. Equipment should be made ready as standby First Aid Posts FAP Unmanned. Gear stowed in lockers. Morphine in Controlled Drug cupboard. Posts and contents of first aid lockers checked periodically. Morphine issued to selected Officers and Senior Rates. Manned. Morphine issued. Medical personnel dispersed throughout the ship. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 4-14 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-1 Change 3CHAPTER 5 NBCD CONDITIONS, RISK AND CONTROL MARKINGS CONTENTS Para Introduction ........................................................ 0501 D i s c i p l i n e .......................................................... 0504 SECTION 1 - RISK MARKINGS W a t e r t i g h t R i s k ..................................................... 0506 R e d R i s k M a r k i n g s .................................................. 0508 E m e r g e n c y C o n t r o l o f R e d O p e n i n g s .................................... 0509 SECTION 2 - CONTROL MARKINGS W a t e r t i g h t C o n t r o l ................................................... 0512 May Be Left Open MBLO Tallies ...................................... 0513 W a t e r t i g h t C o n t r o l Q u a l i f y i n g S y m b o l s .................................. 0516 G a s t i g h t C o n t r o l..................................................... 0517 Citadel and Gas-free Spaces ........................................... 0518 R u l e s f o r W a t e r t i g h t a n d G a s t i g h t C o n t r o l M a r k i n g s ........................ 0519 SECTION 3 - PRINCIPLES OF APPLICATION D e s i g n a t i o n o f O p e n i n g s .............................................. 0522 Citadel Boundaries ................................................... 0524 Scuttles and Windows ................................................ 0525 Bolted Manhole Covers ............................................... 0526 Escape Hatches and Scuttles ........................................... 0527 S p i g o t O p e n i n g s i n W a t e r t i g h t D o o r s .................................... 0528 E x a m p l e s o f T y p i c a l M a r k i n g s ......................................... 0531 W a t e r t i g h t a n d G a s t i g h t C o n d i t i o n s...................................... 0532 R e l a x a t i o n s t o C o n d i t i o n A l f a .......................................... 0533 R e l a t i o n s h i p s B e t w e e n N B C D S t a t e s a n d C o n d i t i o n s........................ 0534 Method of Control ................................................... 0535 C o n t r o l o f O p e n i n g s i n t h e L o w e r N B C D S t a t e s............................ 0536 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-3 OriginalCHAPTER 5 NBCD CONDITIONS, RISK AND CONTROL MARKINGS 0501. Introduction Resistance to flooding depends on water tight integrity protection against NBC contamination entering a ship depends on gastight integrity . Both, in turn, depend on a. Continuous maintenance and routine checks, including air testing, to ensure the watertight and gastight efficiency of bulkheads, decks and the fittings that pierce themsee Chapter 36. b. Disciplinary control of a ll doors, hatches, ventilation valves and other openings. 0502. Structural arrangements in sh ips are described in Chapter 29. Watertight integrity, to a greater or lesser degree, is maintained at all times while a ship is water-borne. Gastight integrityis achieved by closing down the ship when NBC a ttack seems probable or an alarm is given. The object of closing down is to prevent the ingres s of NBC contamination into the ship and thus protect personnel stationed, or taking cover, between decks and also to minimize internal contamination, so that normal liv ing can be resumed and the ship can be a fully fighting and efficient unit as soon as possible after an attack. 0503. When prepared for, or undergoing NBC a ttack, many of the compartments and spaces closed down must be manned, a nd adequate oxygen and tole rable temperatures must be maintained. These requirements depend largely on the internal arrangements of the ship eg efficiency of the air-conditioning system, numbe r of NBC filter units fitted, remote control of machinery and the climate. When a ship is in the closed-down condition, all practicable means must be taken to avoid fouling of the air s ee BR 21702. Bad odours must be suppressed as much as possible, the smoking of tobacco restricted and all sources of heat that are not essentialto fighting or machinery installations must be eliminated or reduced to a minimum examples areheaters, hot cupboards and main cooki ng arrangements in the galley. It is also necessary for free movement to be possible through the main body of the ship and, for this reason, a Citadel is established to include as ma ny compartments as possible. 0504. Discipline Although it is vitally important to maintain the watertight structure and fittings in an efficient condition, experience has shown that pr ogressive flooding has almost always been due to inadequate control of openings. All personne l must be fully convers ant with the system of markings used to make this control effective, both for watertight and gastight integrity, and arecord must be kept of the watertight and gastight condition of the ship at all times. Thewatertight condition is recorded on the NBCD Door and Hatch Board and in the Watertight Integrity Log the gastight condition is recorded on the NBC Ventilation Board. Therequirements of watertight and gastight integrity must inevitably conflict with habitability,routine and freedom of movement. The condition of the ship is thus tied in some ways to the states of readiness dealt with in Chapter 4. The system of markings described in this chapter isintended to meet these conflicting requirements as far as possible and to allow the necessarydegree of flexibility. 0505. Spare.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-4 UK RESTRICTEDSECTION 1 - RISK MARKINGS 0506. Watertight Risk A ship sustaining major underwater damage will probably either sink very quickly 30 minutes or so or, if the first hour is survived and good damage control is exercised, be saved. Realistic estimates can be made of the maximum flooding, attr ibutable to major damage, which would not sink the ship in a short time. This flooding can then be related to the increase indraught, heel and trim for such damage occurring at different places in the ship. Thesecalculations give a zone calle d the Red Risk Zone which extends from the keel to somewhere above the deep waterline, rising higher at the ends and, in a broad ship, at the sides. 0507. The Red Risk Zone is defined by the Ministry of Defence at the design stage of a ship. It provides a guide for the flooding risk area of a ship, where there is a n eed to exercise strict control of openings. 0508. Red Risk Markings Openings to all compartments within the Red Risk Zone are deemed to be, when open, of immediate risk to watertight integrity. These are known as Red Openings, and are marked as follows a.Doors and Hatches. By a red triangle across the upper corner furthest from the hinges. b.Valves and Scuttles. By a red disc with or without an arrow on or near the fitting. 0509. Emergency Control of Red Openings In an emergency such as unexpected damage or imminent collision these openings can be rapidly identified and closed by broadcasting the order CLOSE ALL RED OPENINGS. The broadcast of this order indicates an emergency and that speed is vital. The order overrides any previous watertight order or c oncession, such as May Be Left Open tallies or 2 clip markings. When the order is in force, no Red Opening must be opened without specific permission from NBCD headquarters. The broadcast order may speci fy openings in one partic ular part of the ship or may apply to the whole ship. On hearin g the broadcast CLOSE ALL RED OPENINGS, it is the duty of all personnel, not only the NBCD team s, to shut all Red Openings in their vicinity. The relationship between the broadcasts CLOSE ALL RED OPENINGS and EMERGENCY STATIONS is explained in Chapter 7. 0510-0511. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-5 Change 2SECTION 2 - CONTROL MARKINGS 0512. Watertight Control The main watertight control markings are a. X X-ray In black on doors, hatches, drain cocks, valves, some Y Yankee g65 ventilation fans and ventilation openings including slide valves which affect watertight integrity. Requiredgenerally only in the Red Risk Zone. b. Z Zulu In black on similar openi ngs to above. Required generally only outside the Red Risk Zone to give watertight integrity and protection against bl ast, flash and fire. 0513. May Be Left Open MBLO Tallies Watertight control can also be exercised by the use of MBLO tallies, the purpose of which is indicated on the tally. These tallies and their fastenings must be made from a fireresistant material. The number of MBLO tallies allowed in a ship is to be detailed in the ShipsNBCD Orders. In addition to the standard markings, tallies are to be permanently markedFORWARD or AFT small ships or with the section number in a large ship. There are threetypes of MBLO tallies a.May Be Left Open. To be used on certain openi ngs which would normally be shut in a particular watertight condition but which may need to be open for periods without being attended, eg a door whic h provides passage in almost continuous use by day but which can be shut at night, or a hatch in frequent use during working hours but where it cannot be guaranteed that someone is al ways on hand to shut it instantly. Tallies should not be left on openings for long peri ods merely to gain entry to compartments with difficult access. The number of tallies i ssued must be kept to a minimum and they are not to remain on openings for indefinite periods. The tally should permanently bear the printed words MAY BE LEFT OPEN. Th e location marking of the opening and the conditions for which it is authorized are to be added, by marker pen, at the time ofissue. It is to be hung over the normal contro l marking. In conditions other than that or those for which the tally is authorized, the tally must be withdrawn and the openingcontrolled by its normal marking. When a tally has been issued, responsibility for the opening rests with HQ1 normally through its NBCD patrols. b.May Be Left Open in Action. Openings generally only a few which would normally be shut but may need to be open and possibly remain open for action purposes, should have a tally hung or sc rewed on, not covering the c ontrol marking, and bearing the words MAY BE OPEN IN ACTION. At all times other than those authorized in theShips NBCD Orders, the opening must be controlled by its normal marking.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-6 UK RESTRICTEDc.May Be Left Open - Man Below. Hatches and some doors that need to be open during the course of routine rounds eg gl and spaces and plummer block compartments but which are marked with a watertight control marking X or Y, may remain open forthe duration of the rounds inspection by the use of a tally bearing the words MAY BELEFT OPEN, MAN BELOW. The tally is issued to the department concerned and is tobe hung on the top hatch or door when r ounds of the space commences and removed when rounds are complete and the hatchesdoors are shut. Note. See Volume 2 for details of the tally for use on Alfa doors between sub-citadels. 0514. Keeping in mind the control markings of openings and the general routine which the ship works or is to work, the NBCD Officer should examine the actual watertight state of the ship in each of the three watertight conditions X, Y and Z making allowance for any MBLO tallies that are authorized and for MBLO - MAN BELOW tallies that have been issued to departmentsfor their rounds. Such an examination should place the ship in the most pessimistic state authorized for each condition. The NBCD Officer should then decide how many more openings he can allow to be open in each condition, giving consideration to the need to live and work in the ship. 0515. If a routine is laid down for opening the va rious compartments that have to be visited regularly, the number open at any one time can be kept small. For example FORWARD 3C Canteen Store 0945-10153D Naval Store 1015-1045, 1400-14304E Naval Store 1115-1145, 1500-15304G Magazine 0800-08304H Magazine 0915-09453J Provision Room 0930-09004J Beer Store 1045-1115 AFT 4P Magazine 0830-09004P Naval Store 1015-10454Q Naval Store 0915-0945, 1430-15004R Provision Room 0800-0830 Such a routine allows all pers onnel concerned to know that they may receive permission to open their particular compartments at the times stated, but permission to open must still be obtainedfrom HQ1. In addition to the regular openings as above, allowance must al so be made for casual requirements to open compartments. The total number of openings permitted to be open at anyone time should be worked out on the basis of at least two intact transverse bulkheads between each applied MBLO tally. Once decided, the a llowances should be laid down in the Ships NBCD Orders, and a copy should be inserted in the Watertight Integrity Log or prominently g47 displayed in HQ1SCC. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-7 Original0516. Watertight Control Qualifying Symbols The only qualifying symbols used in c onjunction with water tight control are a. 2-CLIPS On doors and hatches wher e the normal volume of traffic makes full clipping impracticable it may also be used onopenings selected as routes to shelter positions. Theopenings to be so marked are decided by ships officers.All clips are to be put on in emergency. Rules for the useof the 2-clip marking are given in later paragraphs. b. VENT 2-CLIPS Required in some sh ips on venting routes from magazines. VENT NO CLIPS g65 The openings to be so marked are decided by the Ministry of Defence at the design stage. In wartime the ventingcondition is ordered when action is imminent NBCDState 1. In peacetime it is ordered in ships which are in the proximity of a hostile shore line, or boat, or where thethreat from dissidentssaboteurs creates a potentiallydangerous situation. All clips are to be put on in anemergency. 0517. Gastight Control Gastight control is exercised by the assumption of conditi on A Alfa, which is superimposed on the watertight c ondition Z or Y as required. Gastight control markings are letters A, M and R painted orange and the following qualifying symbols a. CITADEL IN On airlock doorshatche s specified for citadel entryexit CITADEL OUT g65 in condition Alfa. They are marked CITADEL IN on the outside and CITADEL OUT on the inside of the citadel.They may be used for access to and from the citadel priorto contamination, after which they are for exit only andaccess to the citadel is via the cleansing station only. Themarkings are painted in orange and the openings somarked are decided by th e Ministry of Defence. b. CLEANSING Entry into the citadel after the ship becomes contaminated STATION must be made only through the cleansing station, the outer door of which leading into the undressing area is markedCLEANSING STATION painted orange. c. SHELTER Routes, on and below the weather deck, to shelter positions are indicated by an arrow and the wordSHELTER, both in orange. A door on the route is thusindicated by signs on the bulkhead on either side pointingto it the door then has on it only the usual risk and controlmarkings, and possibly the 2-CLIP symbol. If a hatch onBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-8 UK RESTRICTEDthe route has no adjacent bulkhead, the symbol is placed on the hatch cover. The broadcast SHELTER SHELTERSHELTER is an emergency order allowing any route somarked to be used. d. SUB-CITADEL Airlock Division. Where passage betw een sub-citadels is via an airlock, the doorshatc hes forming the airlock must bear the appropriate watertight risk and control markingsand the words SUB-CITADEL INOUT on each side. Incondition Alfa the doorshatche s must be shut except for passage. If required to re main open, permission must be obtained from HQ1 and a sentry posted. Single DoorHatch Division. Where passage between sub-citadels is via a single doorhatch, the doorhatch must bear the appropriate watertight risk and control markings,the gastight marking A and the words SUB-CITADEL oneach side. In the sub-citade l condition, the doorhatch will be controlled by the gastight marking A. In the whole-citadel condition, the A markin g should be covered by a disc bearing the words OPEN FOR PASSAGE ONLY andthe appropriate location ma rking of the doorhatch. e. OPEN IN ALFA Fitted on the supply flaps to NBC filter units, which are to be open in Condition Alfa. 0518. Citadel and Gas-free Spaces With regard to gastight integrity, compartments can be placed in four categories a.Citadel. The citadel is defined as the ma in group, or groups, or interconnecting compartments which can be included togeth er within unbroken gastight boundaries and in which air can be recirculated. Moveme nt must be possible throughout the citadel without the need to leave its confines. In some ships, large parts of the superstructure are included in the citadel. The citadel is shown in ships drawings and in theappropriate NBCD Class Book, outlined in orange. b.Citadel - Risk of Contamination. Certain compartments included in the citadel can, in some circumstances, become contaminated as a result of failure of structure orequipment, or because temperature rise necessitates ventilating the space. These arechiefly main or auxiliary machinery spaces, a nd are shown in ships drawings and in the appropriate NBCD Class Book, as CITADEL, RISK OF CONTAMINATION within thecitadel but indicated by a brown wash. c.Gas-free Compartments. Isolated compartments from which gas can be excluded but which, owing to the layout of the ship or for some other reason, cannot be included in the citadel, are called GAS-FR EE COMPARTMENTS or GAS-FREE SPACES. They are shown in ships drawings and in the appropriate NB CD Class Book outlined in purple.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-9 Originald.Gas-free, Contaminated if Used Compartments. Certain compartments, eg fuel storage tanks, some magazines, workshops, can be kept gas -free if not used but will become contaminated if used or ventilated during an NBC attack or in a contaminatedatmosphere. They are shown in ships dr awings and in the appropriate NBCD Class Book as GAS FREE, CONTAMINATED IF USED, outlined with a broken line inalternating orange and purple. 0519. Rules for Watertight and Gastight Control Markings Observance of the rules for the control of watertight and gastight openings is the responsibility of all personnel, and they must be continually aware of which watertight and gastight condition is in force and also of the requirements of each condition. Watch on the maintenance of the condition set is kept by NBCD patrols or by frequent rounds by the Watch on Deck or Duty Watch according to the state of readiness see Chapter 4, and the type and sizeof ship. The rules for control markings are X SHUT IN ALL WATERTIGHT CONDITIONS. To be opened only by permission. If required to be kept ope n, a sentry must be posted or other arrangements made for the opening to be shut instantly on order, or a MBLO tally must be used. Y SHUT IN CONDITIONS Y AND Z. May be open in Condition X-ray. When shut may normally be opened for passage or use but must be immediately shutagain. If required to be kept open in Conditions Yankee or Zulu the rules as for X-ray openings apply. Z SHUT IN CONDITION Z. May be open in Conditions X-ray and Yankee. When shut, the rules as for Yankee openings apply. A SHUT IN CONDITION A. When Condition Alfa is in force, openings so marked are not to be opened w ithout specific permission from HQ1. M In Condition Alfa only, openings so ma rked are under the control of the user department. User de partments must ensure that the orders regarding their M openings are clear and fully understood by their personnel. R Fittings or equipment so marked must continue to run or remain open for recirculation. Note. Shut or Closed means fully clipped, except for openings bearing 2-CLIP or venting symbols in the venting condition. Such openings are to be fully clipped in emergency or, on shelter routes, when the last man is through to shelter. Y 2-CLIP doors except those on shelter routes are to be fully clipped in Condition Zulu. 0520-0521. Spare.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-10 UK RESTRICTED EXAMPLE AND COLOUR SIZE APPLICATION RISK MARKINGS Equal sides 250 mm painted 50 mm TransferRed on both sides of door or hatch, upper corner oppositeedge to hinges. On or near valve, ventilation closure, flap, fan, etc, scuttle. CONTROL MARKINGS Watertight X Y Z Gastight A M R Watertight X Y Z Gastight A M R CLEANSING STATION CITADEL INOUT SUB-CITADEL INOUTg65 g65 g65Embossed Aluminium Tallies Door or Hatch 75 mm Valve, Ventilation Closure, Flap, Fan, Scuttle 40 mm 40 mm Block Letters EmbossedAluminium TalliesWatertight. Upper centre of door or hatch.Gastight. Immediately belowwatertight control. As needed on or near fitting g65 Over or beside outer door of undressing area on selecteddoorshatches. At sub-citadel dividing boundaries. MBLO TALLY 150 mm Square OPEN - 40 mm BlockLocation - 15mmRemainder - 25 mmThree types a. Slotted screw hole forhanging over existing marking.b. Screwed on hatch cover. c. With loop for hanging onhatch. May be left OPEN May be left OPEN in ActionMay be left OPEN, MANBELOW QUALIFYING SYMBOLS 40 mm Block Letters Two Parallel Black Lines 125 mm long, 6mm wide and 15 mmapart - water slidetransfer.Control markings. Vent 2 clips and Vent no clips aresimilar. On 2 clip doors andhatches the parallel lines to beadjacent to clips to be used andangled to show direction clipsshould be put on. Fig 5-1. Risk and Control MarkingsUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-11 OriginalSECTION 3 - PRINCIPLES OF APPLICATION 0522. Designation of Openings Risk and control markings for all new cons truction ships are decided by The Ministry of Defence, and are mandatory. After ship accep tance, standardization of watertight control markings is achieved by the Administrative Authority, in conjunction with The Ministry ofDefence. Watertight risk markings and gastig ht control markings cannot be changed, but if seagoing experience indicates that a change of certain watertight control markings is consideredessential, Commanding Officers are to submit their proposals to their Administrative Authority giving full reasons in support of the proposals. Subject to their agreem ent, the Administrative Authority will forward details of the proposals to The Ministry of Defence for approval before authorizing implementation by ships. 0523. Within the Red Risk Zone, openings that aff ect watertight integr ity should generally be X-ray or Yankee. Zulu is acceptable only where the need for free access at all times, other than in the highest state of readiness, is paramount. Above the Red Risk Zone, openings that need to be shut to prevent ingress or spread of blast, flash or fire should generally be marked Zulu. Doors normally kept locked eg storerooms should be marked Zulu since they can then be opened by the responsible person without refe rence to HQ1. There may be, exceptionally, in some ships, a few doors and hatc hes high in the ship which are much used, do not immediately affect watertight or gastight integrity, and have little value in the restriction of blast, flash or firethese may be left unmarked, and if required to be shut for any r eason they can be shut by order. 0524. Citadel Boundaries Principles of application of watertight and gastight markings for openings in the boundaries of citadels and gas-free spaces are a.Doors and Hatches. X-ray, Yankee or Zulu markings with an orange Alfa or M or gastight qualifying symbol secured immediately below the watertight controlmarking. b.Ventilation. This must be marked according to the needs of the compartment served. Some ventilation openings, valves and fans can bear the same risk and controlmarkings as the access to the compartment concerned eg some magazines andstorerooms. Other systems must continue in operation in a high watertight conditionand would then normally be controlled by a gastight control marking A, M or R but should bear in addition the a ppropriate watertight risk marking. To reduce the chances of spreading fire, flood or contamination thr ough ventilation systems, it is important that non-essential ventila tion is so marked as to reduce its use in the high NBCD conditions to a minimum. c.Scuppers, Drains and Soil Pipes 1 Any scupper, drain or soil pipe that has no opening into the citadel needs no marking other than the watertight risk marking red on the screw-down storm valveand its remote handwheel.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-12 UK RESTRICTED2 In ships with citadels, all scuppers, drains and so il pipes opening into the citadel should be f itted with 150 mm water seals. No gastight marking is then needed but the storm valves and thei r handwheels should ha ve the appropriate watertight risk marking. d.Discharge Overboard Valves 1 All discharge overboard valves are to be painted black and require a watertight risk and gastight control marking as necessary. 2 If the valve is inside a compartment or hidden behind ships side linings then a notice stating DISCHARGE OB Vv 50 mm black lettering on the background paint scheme must be clear ly displayed on the door or adjacent structure to the door leading to the compartment, or on the lining panel leading to the valve. Risk andcontrol markings are not required at this position. 0525. Scuttles and Windows a. All scuttles including those for emer gency escape and windows in the citadel boundaries are a risk to gastight integrity, a nd those within the Red Risk Zone are a risk to watertight integrity. C onsequently all opening scu ttles, windows and deadlights to fixed side scuttles in cita del boundaries should bear the appropriate gastight orange control marking used to denote risk it will then be mandatory for them to be shut onassuming Condition Alfa. b. All opening scuttles on ships sides or internal within the Red Risk Zone, including deadlights to fixed scuttles, should bear the watertight red risk marking in addition to any gastight control marking. They should not, however, be given a watertight control marking. c. The opening and closing of scuttles s hould be under the direct control of the Command through the NBCDODCO. In an emergency, the order CLOSE ALL RED OPENINGS overrides any permission which may have been given to open scuttles somarked. d. Light-excluding plates fitted to viewing ports in watertight doors and hatches for darken ship arrangements do not require watertight or gastight markings.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-13 Change 10526. Bolted Manhole Covers These bear no risk or control markings. They are considered to be part of the structure in which they are situated. However, should they be removed for any purpose eg maintenance, inspection, upkeep period, etc the fact must be reported to and recorded in HQ1 with the times opened and resecured and the Tag Out procedure must be followed. 0527. Escape Hatches and Scuttles a. Escape hatches and scuttles do not, normally, bear risk or control markings. Chapter 3 details the identification colours and markings to be used for all escape routes. b. Escape hatches are not to be covered by carpet or any fittings likely to interfere with their use. Carpets surrounding an escape ha tch are to be correc tly fitted and secured clear of the hatch cover. c. With the exception of emergencies, HQ1 is to be informed prior to an escape hatch being left open whilst unattended, and the area is to be cordoned off to prevent accidents. 0528. Spigot Openings in Watertight Doors Spigots are incorporated in doors at various locations in T42s 2 deck and CVSs 5 deck in order to provide a means of air flowp ressure equalization when the doors are shut, thus reducing the likelihood of injury to personnel on opening. Spigot caps are usually to remain off and stowed in their respective stowages T42, or unscrewed CVS, whenever the ships NBCD condition requires the parent door to be shut. They are to be on T42 or closed CVS as g47 follows g47 a. When the parent door is part of a smoke boundary. g47 b. Whenever the door forms a sub-citadel boundary. g47 g47 c. As a State 1 preparation not at Air Raid Warning Red. g47 d. When the order CLOSE ALL RED OPENINGS has been made and the spigot g47 bears a red risk marking. 0529. NBCD markings on spigots should be as follows a. All 2 deck T42 or 5 d eck CVS door spig ots should have an R gas control marking. b. Spigots should bear a red risk markin g consistent with their parent doors. 0530. Ships NBCD Orders must contain a st andard operating procedure, for any NBCD statecondition, to ensure that in the event of an incident, the spigot caps appropriate to the incidentsmoke boundary are closed without delay.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-14 UK RESTRICTED0531. Examples of Typical Markings The following are typical of the markings that might be found on various accesses, mainly in the red zone Magazines X or Y possible use of a MAY BE LEFT OPEN IN ACTION tally. MEOs rounds spaces X or Y possible use of a MAY BE LEFT OPEN - MAN BELOW tally. Bathroom in Red Risk Zone Y door or Y hatch with Z manhole. Gangway door, Red Risk Zone Y 2-clips if necessary. see Note 1 Gangway door, above the Red Z 2-clips if necessary. Risk Zone Workshops, hatch access Y if spring loaded or ma nhole fitted Z if no manhole or not able to be opened from below. Mess spaces and cabin flats with Y hatch, Z manhole. manhole see Note 2 Mess spaces and cabin flats Z hatch. without manhole see Note 2 Messdeck, small ship see Note 2 Z generally.Messdeck, door access see Note 2 Y or Z according to traffic.Main Naval Store see Note 2 Y hatch, Z manhole. Z if no manhole. Other stores, working spaces, Y or Z. cable passages, etc see Note 2 Main Machinery Space see Note 3 Where two accesses, one Y, one Z.Generator Room see Note 3 X or Y.Pump Space see Note 3 X or Y.Sonar Compartment, manned Y if openable from below if not, X and MAY BE see Note 3 LEFT OPEN - MAN BELOW disc. Hangar access door Y or Z with A.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-15 OriginalNotes 1. In some ships, gangway doors in the Red Risk Zone are in such continual use that even Y 2-clip markings are not acceptable. With careful consideration, such doors may be marked Z or, in extreme cases, where frequency and rapid passage is needed even in State 1, Z 2-clipmight be more appropriate. 2. In war, it may be necessary to post orders at the entrance to ensure that if the space is in the Red Risk Zone, and occupied, the last man out shuts the opening. 3. These openings may need an M in addition. Doors and hatches that give access between machinery spaces and citadels or gas-free spaces, must bear a gastight marking in addition to the watertight marking. 0532. Watertight and Gastight Conditions Watertight conditions are normally used as shown below, but this does not preclude the Command from ordering a higher condition when it is deemed to be necessary. Watertight conditions govern the watertight integrity of the ship and, since there is always a threat to watertight integrity, there is always a watertight condition in force. The condition ordereddepends on the calculated risk of damage and, to facilita te ships routine and habitability, should always be the lowest condition consistent with the risk. Watertight conditions are normally usedas follows a.In peace Condition X-ray X openings shut Harbour and normal cruising. Condition Yankee X and Y shut D angerous circumstances eg navigational hazards, exercises. Condition Zulu X, Y and Z shut As required for exercise. b.In war Condition Yankee X and Y shut H arbour and normal cruising. Condition Zulu X, Y and Z shut Action or relaxed action. The gastight condition Alfa is superimposed on watertight conditions Zulu and Yankee as required. Condition Alfa is the only gastight condition it is the fully closed down conditionwhich gives complete collective citadel protection against NBC hazards. 0533. Relaxations to Condition Alfa In certain circumstances relaxations to Condition Alfa may be permitted. Guidance is given in BR 21702. To improve habitability when condition Alfa is in force for lengthy periods, certain specific Alfa openings may be opened at the discretion of the Command when the ship is in either NBCD State 1 or State 2. The openings selected must not form a set gastightcondition but, if the operational situation permits, should satisfy only the immediate requirement, eg main galley ventilation to allo w the cooking of a main meal, or the heads ventilation as andBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-16 UK RESTRICTEDwhen possible. The openings which may be opene d may vary depending on the tactical situation andor the climate. When it is considered that the NBC threat allows certain relaxations tocondition Alfa, the Command should inform HQ1. HQ1 must then order the required openings to be open specifically by namelocation marking, the order being given to the appropriate Fire and Repair Party Post or Section Base large ship. This routine must be followed on eachoccasion of allowing relaxations to condition Al fa. the openings selected must be capable of being shut immediately on order, by a sentry if necessary. Note. When a ship is in Condition Alfa it is vitally important that the citadel pressure remains positive, even when relaxations to the condition ar e in force and one or more Alfa openings are open. Because firm guide lines cannot be laid down, it is recommended that ships officers take every opportunity to check citadel pressures with various combinations of Alfa openings open those most likely to be used in a relaxation of condition Alfa, supply and exhaust fans running, cleansing station in use, etc, and record the results. 0534. Relationships Between NB CD States and Conditions As explained in Chapter 4, NBCD states of readiness used in conjunction with watertight and gastight conditions, are the means by which a ship can be prepared to meet all the varying circumstances of service in peace and war. It must be borne in mind that states and conditions are completely separate and must be ordered separately. The following gives practicablerelationships between states and conditions and the circumstances under which they would generally apply. They are neither mandatory nor rigid, but are intended as guidance in producing the best working arrangements. The gastight C ondition Alfa must never be used alone, but must be superimposed, when needed, on a wate rtight condition, usually Zulu or Yankee. a.NBCD State 1 Action state. The highest state of NB CD preparedness, w ith all NBCD positions fully manned and relaxations for meals, etc, ordered as necessary and whencircumstances permit.Assumed as far as practicable when EMERGENCY STATIONS is broadcast. Normal for Awkward State 1.Probable watertight condition Zulu. Gastight condition None or Alfa. b.NBCD State 2 Normal war state at sea and in harbour. Normally associated with the weapon st ate Defence Stations two watches. Normal for Awkward State 2.Probable watertight condition Yankee. Gastight condition None or Alfa.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-17 Change 3c.NBCD State 3 Normal peace st ate at sea and in harbour. Gastight condition NoneProbable watertight condition 1 Sea. X-ray under circumstances of navi gational hazard, eg fog, gale, narrow waters, RAS, entering and leaving har bour, etc, the watertight condition can be upgraded to Yankee with the addition of Special Sea Dutyme n who would include any special provision for the particular hazard, for example, HQ1 patrols when entering harbour in very poor visibility. 2 Harbour. X-ray with latitude for maintenance, etc. 0535. Method of Control In all ships in the higher states of NBCD readiness, overall control of the watertight and gastight conditions must be exercised from HQ1. In the lower states, control is exercised from HQ1 through its watchkeepers, from the SCC through its NBCD watchkeepers, or the OOWOOD usually through the Quartermaster, depending on the size and type of ship. NBCD states and conditions should be set by br oadcast or, in harbour, they may be set by routine Daily Orders. Although the state alone, or the condition alone, can be changed at any time, it is better than both should be mentioned, eg. a. In State 3, Condition X-ray - pipe ASSUME NBCD STATE 3 CONDITION YANKEE. b. In State 3, Condition Yankee - pipe ASSUME NBCD STATE 1 CONDITION g47 YANKEE ALFA. c. In State 2, Condition Yankee Alfa - pipe REVERT TO NBCD STATE 2 CONDITION YANKEE. 0536. Control of Openings in the Lower NBCD States The object of controlling watertight openings in the lower states of NBCD readiness is to maintain as high a degree of watertight integrity as possible, consistent with the working ofthe ship, and so limit the extent of flooding in th e event of sudden damage. Such control serves also to limit the number of openings that need to be shut to achieve NBCD State 1 Condition Zulu. The NBCD Door and Hatch Board should be used to show the openings that are opened. 0537. The number of MBLO tallies provided corres ponds to the number of openings allowed to be open at any one time. When a particular watertight condition is assumed, the watchkeeper in HQ1, or the Quartermaster, is issued with the appropriate number of MBLO tallies. Anyoneseeking to open an X-ray opening, or keep open a Yankee opening in Condition Yankee may be given permission by the watchkeeper , provided that a tally is availa ble to be issued, and at least two intact transverse bulkheads exist between the intended opening and any other approved tallied, opening. The tally should be hung on the ope ning concerned as an indication to patrols that permission has been obtained for it to be open. The tally must be returned to the watchkeeper as soon as the opening is shut. The OOWOOD need be approached only if it is thought essential to exceed the number of openings authorized to be open in that condition in that part of ship.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 5-18 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6-1 OriginalCHAPTER 6 ROYAL FLEET AUXILIARY CONTENTS Para D e s i g n R e q u i r e m e n t s ................................................. 0601 L o c a t i o n M a r k i n g s ................................................... 0602 R i s k a n d C o n t r o l M a r k i n g s ............................................ 0603 W a t e r t i g h t M a r k i n g s ................................................. 0604 G a s t i g h t M a r k i n g s ................................................... 0606 C o n t r o l o f W a t e r t i g h t O p e n i n g s......................................... 0609 N B C D C o n d i t i o n s ................................................... 0610 N B C D S t a t e s ....................................................... 0612 S h i p S a f e t y P l a n s F i r e C o n t r o l P l a n s ................................... 0613 B R 8 7 5 ............................................................ 0614 W a t e r F o g L a n c e .................................................... 0615 SignallingGuide Lines ............................................... 0616 I n t e r n a t i o n a l S h o r e C o n n e c t i o n ......................................... 0617 ANNEXES Annex A Control of RFA Openings - No NBC Threat Annex B Control of RFA Openings - With an NBC ThreatBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6-3 OriginalCHAPTER 6 ROYAL FLEET AUXILIARY 0601. Design Requirements Ships of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary RFA are constructed to Merchant Navy standards. They are required to comply with the Safety of Life at Sea SOLAS regu lations, issued by the International Maritime Organisation IMO. The IMO is a specialist agency of the UnitedNations which aims to provide cooperation between governments on technical matters affecting international merchant shipping. SOLAS is enforced through the Maritime and CoastguardAgency MCA, along with other statutory re quirements particular to the United Kingdom. Additionally, because of their operational commitments a nd tasks in company with ships of the Royal Navy, many RFAs are fitted to conform to RN requirements for NBC collective protection,eg citadel and prewetting arrangements. A large percentage of RFA ships are fitted with anautomatic firefighting water sp ray system quartzoid bulb throughout their accommodation and stores areas, and a drenching system CO 2, halon, foam or steam in their machinery compartments and other high risk spaces. Specialized ships, ie those which carry particularlyflammable cargo, are fitted with specialized sy stems for fire suppression and extinction. The RFA conforms to RN standard of NBCD, modified to suit circ umstances which are peculiar to RFAs. 0602. Location Markings Location markings follow the standard RN practice as set out in Chapter 3 of this manual. The only difference is that the numbering of frame spaces is from aft to forward inaccordance with merchant ship practice frame spaces in a warship are numbered from forward to aft, but this does not affect the use of the RN system of location markings. 0603. Risk and Control Markings The RFA Flotilla uses a risk and control marking system which is different to that used in Royal Navy vessels. There are two categories of markings a.Watertight. Coloured red. b.Gastight. Coloured orange or green. 0604. Watertight Markings Watertight openings on or below the first contin uous deck a bove the deep waterline present the greatest risk to watertight integrity, and are marked by a red disc red disc opening. These openings are to be kept closed at all times, except when access is required. Red disc openings covers all stat utory watertight openings. 0605. Watertight openings higher in the ship pres ent a lower risk, but must be closed during periods of increased risk to preserve the rese rve of buoyancy. These openings are marked by a red triangle red tr iangle openings. 0606. Gastight Markings Gastight openings which need to be clos ed for collective protection against NBC contamination, and which may normally be left closed without degrading habitability or access, are marked by an orange disk orange disc openings.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6-4 UK RESTRICTED 0607. Other gastight openings, which need to be closed for collective protection, but are normally required to be open for ha bitability or access, are marked by an orange triangle orange triangle openings. 0608. Gastight openings which woul d normally be closed, but ar e required to be open for recirculation when the ship is closed down for collective protec tion, are marked by a green disc green disc openings. 0609. Control of Watertight Openings The Officer of the Watch OOW or Officer of the Day OOD is to maintain the Watertight Integrity BoardLog, which indicates the status of red disc openings at all times. TheEngineer Officer of the Watch EOOW may aut horize temporary opening of red disc openings which provide access to machinery spaces. The EOOW need not obtain permission from the OOWOOD, unless there is a speci fic order to do so, provided that the opening is closed immediately after transiting through it. 0610. NBCD Conditions The NBCD Condition reflects the posture of the ships equipment, shut-down and machinery state. It encompasses the various levels of watertight and gastight integrity. There arefour conditions 1, 2, 3 and 4. Each one of th ese conditions may be suffixed by the letter N November to indicate collective protection fro m an NBC threat. Additionally, Condition 1 indicates that machinery and equipment prepara tions for Action have been completed. The four condition are defined as follows a. Condition 1 - Immediate risk of damage.b. Condition 2 - War cruising.c. Condition 3 - Peacetime cruising.d. Condition 4 - Harbour 0611. The relationship between NBCD Conditions a nd the closure of watertight and gastight openings, when there is no NBC threat, is show n at Table 6-1. The relationship when an NBC threat exists is shown at Table 6-2. The control of openings for each situation is explained ingreater details at Annexes 6A and 6B. Table 6-1. NBCD Conditions - No NBC ThreatUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6-5 Original Table 6-2. NBCD Condition s - With an NBC Threat 0612. NBCD States In RFAs, NBCD States relate to the stat e of manpower and machinery to meet the expected threat. There are various manning requirements which will be given separatelydepending on the threat a. Action Stations - Condition 1 or 2.b. Defence routines, highlow threat - Condition 1 or 2.c. Harbour routinestations, sea going routin e, Emergency Stations - Condition 3 or 4. 0613. Ship Safety Plans Fire Control Plans Under SOLAS all RFA ships s hould have Ship Safety Plans displayed for the guidance of the Ships Staff. All ships should hold a duplicate set of plans permanently stored in aprominently marked weather-tight enclosure outside the deckhouse for the assistance of shoreside fire fighting personnel. The information on th e plans should show clearly for each deck the control stations, various fire sections enclosed by A and B class divisions see Para 2920 together with particulars of the fire detection and fire alarm systems, the sprinkler installation andfire extinguishing appliances. A fuller descri ption of the requirements can be found in the consolidated version of SOLAS. Attention is dr awn to the requirement for these plans to be kept up to date. For RFAs the plans are produ ced and supplied by SSAADSRFADASG any amendments are to be addressed through CO MRFA in accordance with NBCD Amendments. 0614. BR 875 BR 875 is COMRFAs Quality and Safety Management System. It meets the requirements of IMOs Internati onal Safety Management Code. BR 875 contains the procedures to be used by the RFA flotilla in respect of NBCD. Where no procedures exist in BR 875 then the RN standards are to be adopted as de tailed in the BR 2170 series and in BR 4007. 0615. Water Fog Lance There is a SOLASMCA requirement that Cl ass 1 passenger sh ips be equipped with water fog lances for firefighting. They are therefore carried in LSLs, although they are notcodified for general naval use. The water fog lance see Fig 6-1 produces an elongated spherical cloud of very fine water mistfog and it is used for fighting fires in inaccessible areas such as under vehicles. The fine water fo g is suitable for extinguishing fi res in Class A solid materialsBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6-6 UK RESTRICTED and small pools of high flash point fuels, such as DIESO or AVCAT. The lance is fitted with a male instantaneous connection and a ball valve for controlling the flow. Its capability andperformance can be considerably extended by f eeding it with an AFFF solution, using an inline inductor. Fig 6-1. Water Fog Lance 0616. SignallingGuide Lines SOLASMCA require RFAs to carry signallingguide lines. A technical description for the line can be found in SOLAS and MSN 1665M, Schedule 5 Breathing Apparatus. The lines are fire proof, wire cored, stor ed wrapped around BA stowages. One end is fitted with a brass quick release clip the other has secured to it instructions for signalling. The wire core of the lineis susceptible to corrosion and is not readily acce ssible for inspection. The outer wrap of the line is to offer better grip in wet conditions and does not contribute to the lines strength Note. The lines are only to be used for signalli ng and as guides, they are not to be used for lifting equipment. 0617. International Shore Connection There is a SOLASMCA requirement for all RF As to be equipped w ith an international shore connection constructed to ex act dimensions. One end is to have a standard international shore connection flange 178mm OD, 64mm ID, eight 132mm PCD holes slotted to flangeperiphery and the other is to have a coupling that will fit the particular ships hydrants and hoses.2 in instantaneous male coupling in the majority of RFAs. The connection is to be keptonboard each RFA, ready for immediate use, together with its gasket, bolts and washers. The connection is illustrated at Fig 6-2.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6-7 Original Fig 6-2. International Shore ConnectionBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6-8 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6A-1 Original ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 6 CONTROL OF RFA OPENINGS - NO NBC THREAT 1. Condition 1 Immediate Risk of Damage. CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS THREAT.NO NBC THREAT.The highest condition of Watertight integrity.All Red openings closed and secured.Orange Disc openings, closed and secured.Orange Triangle openings designated for a conventional threat closed and secured. No requirement for the ship to be fully s hut down for gastight integrity, however the maximum number of Orange Tr iangle openings are to be closed to reduce the spread of fire and smoke.Ship closed up at Action Stations, w eapons manned, habita bility disregarded. Precursor to Condition 2. 2. Condition 2 War Cruising. CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS THREAT.NO NBC THREAT.The highest condition of Watertight integrity.All Red Disc and Re d Triangle openings closed and secured. Orange Disc openings closed and secured.Ship closed up at Defence Watches. 3. Condition 3 Peacetime Cruising. NO WEAPONS THREAT.NO NBC THREAT.Relaxed watertight integrity, except during evolutions which require an increase inwatertight integrity.All Red Disc openings closed and secured.Red Triangle openings shut to effect increased watertig ht integrity andor darken ship.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6A-2 UK RESTRICTED 4. Condition 4 In Harbour Condition. NO WEAPONS THREAT.NO NBC THREAT.Relaxed watertight integrity.Red Disc openings relaxed durin g working day for access, to be closed at the end of the working day.Red Disc openings in machinery spaces - the EOOWDuty Engineer is charged withensuring that these openings are only opened for passage of personnel. Red Triangle ope nings relaxed.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6B-1 Original ANNEX B TO CHAPTER 6 CONTROL OF RFA OPENINGS - WITH AN NBC THREAT 1. Condition 1N Immediate Risk of Damage CONVENTIONAL AND NBC WEAPONS THREAT.The highest condition of Watertight integrity.All Red openings closed and secured.The highest condition of Gastight integrity.All Orange openings closed and secured.All Green Disc openings open.Ship closed up for collective protecti on, AFUs running, c itadel pressurised. Ship closed up at Action Stations.Precursor to Condition 2N 2. Condition 2N War Cruising CONVENTIONAL AND NBC WEAPONS THREAT.The highest condition of Watertight integrity.All Red openings closed and secured.The highest condition of Gastight integrity.All Orange openings closed and secured.All Green Disc openings open.Ship closed up for collective protecti on, AFUs running, c itadel pressurised. Ship closed up at Defence Watches. 3. Condition 3N Peacetime Cruising NO CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS THREAT.WITH AN NBC THREAT Terrorists, che mical plantnuclear plant incident. The highest condition of Watertight integrity.All Red openings closed and secured.The highest condition of Gastight integrity.All Orange openings closed and secured.All Green Disc openings open.Ship closed up for collective protecti on, AFUs running, c itadel pressurised.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 6B-2 UK RESTRICTED 4. Conditon 4N In Harbour Condition NO CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS THREAT.WITH AN NBC THREAT Terrorists, che mical plantnuclear plant incident The highest condition of Watertight integrity.All Red openings closed and secured.The highest condition of Gastight integrity.All Orange openings closed and secured.All Green Disc openings open.Ship closed up for collective protecti on, AFUs running, c itadel pressurised.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-1 OriginalCHAPTER 7 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES AT SEA AND IN HARBOUR CONTENTS SECTION 1 - EMERGENCY STATIONS Para P u r p o s e............................................................ 0701 A c t i o n............................................................. 0702 A u t h o r i t y .......................................................... 0703 P r o c e d u r e .......................................................... 0704 C o n t r o l ............................................................ 0705 E x e r c i s e s .......................................................... 0706 A u d i b l e A l a r m s ..................................................... 0707 R F A A u d i b l e A l a r m s ................................................. 0708 SANDOWN Class MHC - Smoke Alarm SystemGeneral Alarm .............. 0709 SECTION 2 - EMERGENCY IN HARBOUR P u r p o s e............................................................ 0720 Personnel .......................................................... 0721 A c t i o n............................................................. 0722 P r o c e d u r e .......................................................... 0723 C o n t r o l ............................................................ 0724 SECTION 3 - CASUALTY ALARMS C a s u a l t y A l a r m P r o c e d u r e ............................................. 0730BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-3 OriginalCHAPTER 7 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES AT SEA AND IN HARBOUR SECTION 1 - EMERGENCY STATIONS 0701. Purpose EMERGENCY STATIONS have been develope d over many years to provide a simple standard procedure that will bring a ship to a high state of manning and material preparednessto deal with any hazardous situation in which Action Stations would not be appropriate. The routine thus evolved is a ra pid and effective countermeasur e which will provide the Command with an organisation capable of regaining the initiative in the event of a. Fire.b. Collision or grounding.c. Aircraft or explosive accident.d. Flood.e. Unexpected mine explosion MCMV in State 2 mine hunting operations. 0702. Action It must be specified in Ships Standing Orders that the broadcast of EMERGENCY STATIONS requires the following actions to be carried out a.Manning 1 Personnel on watch are to remain closed up until relieved or otherwise ordered. 2 Personnel engaged in first aid measures to combat the hazard are to continue with their task until relieved by the NBCD team. 3 NBCD teams are to close up as for NBCD State 1. Firefighters are to dress in full firefighting rig ready for deployment. ME and WE officers and senior rates are to close up, as detailed in de partmental orders, to provi de the fullest control over machinery. 4 Additional messengers are to close up at the Command position.5 Additional internal communication num bers are to close up at positions detailed in the Orders. 6 First aid parties are to close up.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-4 UK RESTRICTED7 The remainder of the hands are to act as ordered by the Command, either to remain in their present position or to proceed to stated muster points. The NBCDteams are not to be impeded. Hands are not to return to their mess decks to collectlifejackets, but should carry them if immediately available all ships haveemergency lifejacket stow ages on the upper deck. b.Material 1 Additional electrical power is to be made available from standby generators. 2 All sea water service pumps are to be run up, discharging to the HP sea water main. System isolation is to be strictly controlled by HQ1. 3 Fire and repair parties are to carry out the following State 1 preparations if time permits a Unlock and check damage repair , fire and electrical lockers. b Check compartment locks and keys.c Ensure that there are no suction strainer hazards in the lower compartments. d Check state of openings, including ventilation. 4 Main machinery is to be controlled from the machinery control position. 0703. Authority The authority to initiate EMERGENCY STAT IONS rests with the Command. He may wish to delegate this authority in his Standing Orders to the Officer of the Watch at sea in theevent of a. Imminent collision or grounding.b. Helicopter crash on deck.c. Main machinery space fire in MMPP piped by ANBCDO if SSEP is already activated. 0704. Procedure The pipe EMERGENCY STATIONS should be made personally by the Executive Officer if the circumstan ces permit. It should always be pr eceded by the general alarm but see Para 0707. The pipe EMERGENCY STATIONS must be followed by CLOSE ALL RED OPENINGS if there is a risk of flooding eg imminent collision or grounding. At other times the pipe CLOSE ALL RED OPENINGS is not required because its application will cause unnecessary restriction of access. Care should be taken to broa dcast any additional orders or information that will clarify the situation and improve response. The broadcast should include any special instructions for the mustering of spare hands in order to reduce interference with thework of the NBCD partie s see Para 0702a7 above.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-5 Original0705. Control Circumstances may dictate that Command and HQ1 teams cannot operate from their primary positions. They must ensure that th eir locations are known, especially to their subordinates, and that messenger s are properly briefed. The spar e hands at muster points see Para 0702a7 above are to be mustered by divi sional officers or senior ratings, and reported to the Officer of the Watch. They are then to be controlled by the Executive Officer, normallythrough the Officer of the Watch. 0706. Exercises EMERGENCY STATIONS should be exercise d frequently and it should be borne in mind that the evolution is not, and should not be viewed as, a prelude to abandon ship. 0707. Audible Alarms a.The General Alarm. This is to precede the emergency broadcast on the following occasions of real emergency 1 Hands to Action Stations to combat a real threat. 2 Hands to Emergency StationsEmergency Clear Lower Deck.3 Fire.4 Flood.5 Collision or grounding imminent.6 Emergency landingcrash on deck but not precautionary landing. The general alarm is not to be used for any other emergencies, nor during any exercises. The only time the general alarm is to be sounded, other than in one of the six real emergencies above, will be during alarm testing when a suitable prefix pipe is to be made. b.Chemical Alarm. The chemical alarm is to be used in an operational NBC context. It may also be used in an NBC exercise. It is not to be used for any other purpose. Tests should be prefixed by an appropriate pipe. The use of these alarms, as detailed above, is to ensure immediate awareness of all personnel onboard as soon as the alarm is sounded, followed by the swift and correct response by those involved in combatting the emergency or taking specific action for personal safety or survival.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-6 UK RESTRICTED0708. RFA Audible Alarms To comply with statutory regulations, audi ble alarms in RFA vessels will be sounded as necessary both in the Action and Exercise scenario. 0709 SANDOWN Class MHC - Smoke Alarm SystemGeneral Alarm When the fire detection system initiates a fire alarm indication at the SCC which is not accepted by the operator, an output from the fire detection panel in the console will activate the General Alarm after a delay of approximately two minutes. Note. If muted, the detection system must be closely monitored, and all new annunciations accepted and the appropriate pipe made, ie SMOKE ALARM, SMOKE ALARM, SMOKE ALARM and location. It is unacceptable for the General Alarm to be automatically activated during exercises, or through the negligence of opera tors who fail to monitor the system correctly. 0710 to 0719. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-7 OriginalSECTION 2 - EMERGENCY IN HARBOUR 0720. Purpose While most of the emergencies listed in Para 0701 could happen in harbour, the use of EMERGENCY STATIONS would generally be ina ppropriate as a number of key ratings may be ashore. Therefore, a differe nt system for dealing with emer gencies in har bour is required. 0721. Personnel Initially, the Duty Part of th e Watch will be used to deal with any harbour emergency. Should the Duty Part be unable to cope with the situation it will be necessa ry to muster all hands remaining on board including civilian pe rsonnel where appropria te in order to a. Have all hands available to brief and employ as required. b. Ensure all personnel are accounted for. The pipe is to be used is EMERG ENCY EMERGENCY EMERGENCY - EMERGENCY CLEAR LOWER DECK. MUSTER ............................. As the Local Area Fire Brigade willnormally want all pe rsonnel not engaged in fighting the fire to be cleared from the ship, the jetty area adjacent to the main gangway should be cons idered the preferred location for mustering if circumstances permit. 0722. Action It must be specified in Ships Sta nding Orders that the pipe EMERGENCY EMERGENCY EMERGENCY - EMERGENCY CLEAR LOWER DECK requires thefollowing action to be taken a.Manning 1 Duty Part of the Watch remain cl osed up to deal with the emergency. 2 Personnel engaged in first aid measures to combat the hazard are to continue with their task until properly relieved. 3 All remaining hands are to muster at a poi nt stated in the pipe. If possible they should take warm clothing with them, particularly at night, but they are not to waste time in returning to their messdecks in order to obtain the clothing. 4 Damage control and first aid personne l should be mustered apart from the remainder of the hands in or der to be more easily deta iled to support the Fire and Emergency Party. b.Material. As far as possible and as applicab le, material arrangements should be as given in Para 0702b.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-8 UK RESTRICTEDc.MMPPs. In the event of an emergency in harbour, the Officer of the Day is to establish HQ1 at the QMs gangway position. To enable him to effectively muster hands, account for personnel, liaise with external em ergency services and coordinate assistance from adjacent ships, the recommended muster point for all hands and visitors is on thejetty adjacent to the gangway. The gangway peg-board, visitors log and ashore on dutybook should all be used to account for personnel. 0723. Procedure The pipe EMERGENCY EMERGENCY EMERGENCY - EMERGENCY CLEAR LOWER DECK should be made personally by the O fficer of the Day, or the senior officer on board if circumstances permit. The pipe should always be preceded by the main broadcast alarm and followed by the location of the safe area where the hands are to muster. Care should be taken to broadcast any additional orders or information that will clarify the situation and improveresponse. Departmental nominal lists should be compared with leave boardscards to ascertain the names of those who should be onboard, and an officer or rating should be nominated from available personnel to muster non-duty personnel and report back to the OOD. 0724. Control The Officer of the Day is to remain in charge of dealing with the emergency until relieved by a more senior officer . The allocation of extra hands is normally to be coordinated by the officer or senior rate in charge at the muster point. 0725 - 0729. SpareUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-9 Change 1SECTION 3 - CASUALTY ALARMS 0730. Casualty Alarm Procedure Upon a casualty being discovered, the following loud vocal alarm LVA is to be used CASUALTY, CASUALTY, CASUALTY. This is to include the location of thecasualtycasualties and is to be repeated until acknowledged. 0731. In peacetime it is appr opriate to make a Main Broadcas t pipe, to include the relevant information. This will ensure that the Medical Branch RatingDuty First AiderStanding Sea First Aid Party respond quickly. In the Acti on State casualties should not be piped. The information should be passed through MHQ. 0732. In ships without MHQs MMPP1PBS casualty alarms are to be made over the Main Broadcast in the Action State since the Coxs wainXO may not be in a position to respond to casualty information be ing passed by telephone. 0733. The Casualty Alarm should not detract pers onnel from their duty to raise a FireFlood Alarm LVAs, but should be included in it.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 7-10 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-1 Change 3CHAPTER 8 NBCD COMMAND AND CONTROL CONTENTS SECTION 1 - ACTION ORGANISATION Para T h e C o m m a n d T e a m ................................................. 0802 T h e C o m m a n d A i m .................................................. 0803 C o m m a n d A d v i s e r ................................................... 0804 A c t i o n N B C D O A N B C D O ........................................... 0806 C o m m a n d R o v e r .................................................... 0808 D i r e c t o r s o f I n t e r n a l W a r f a r e........................................... 0810 D a m a g e C o n t r o l O f f i c e r D C O ........................................ 0811 D a m a g e C o n t r o l O f f i c e r E l e c t r i c a l D C O L ............................. 0812 Propulsion Manager PM ............................................. 0813 Officer in Charge of the Weapon Section Base OIC WSB ................... 0814 Command Huddles ................................................... 0815 T h e B r i d g e T e a m .................................................... 0817 F i r e a n d R e p a i r P a r t i e s................................................ 0820 C o m p o s i t i o n o f a F i r e a n d R e p a i r P a r t y................................... 0825 D C F F P a t r o l s ..................................................... 0826 Dispersal of FRP Personne l and Blanket Search when at NBCD State 1 ......... 0827 M a c h i n e r y O p e r a t i n g T e a m ............................................ 0828 M o b i l e R e p a i r P a r t y M R P ............................................ 0831 Weapon Repair Organisation ........................................... 0832 The Weapon Section Base WSB ....................................... 0833 Tasks of Weapon Repair Personnel ...................................... 0834 D a m a g e R e p o r t s..................................................... 0836 F o l l o w - u p R e p o r t s ................................................... 0837 N a r r a t i v e o f E v e n t s .................................................. 0838 I n c i d e n t A s s e s s m e n t b y t h e C o m m a n d R o v e r .............................. 0839 S t a n d a r d O p e r a t i n g P r o c e d u r e s S O P .................................... 0841 Estimated Time Back on Line ETBOL .................................. 0842 N B C D C o m m a n d a n d C o n t r o l C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ........................... 0844 N B C D C o m m u n i c a t i o n P r o c e d u r e s...................................... 0845 Initial Contact Report ................................................. 0848 F l a s h P r o c e d u r e ..................................................... 0850 M e s s a g e C h i t s ...................................................... 0851 SECTION 2 - CONTROL POSITIONS H Q 1 .............................................................. 0861 Secondary NBCD Headquarters HQ2 ................................... 0862 Alternative NBCD Headquarters AHQ .................................. 0863 S e c t i o n B a s e s ....................................................... 0864 F i r e a n d R e p a i r P a r t y P o s t s F R P P ...................................... 0865BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-2 UK RESTRICTEDCONTENTS Continued Para U p p e r D e c k R e - e n t r y F i r e P a r t y P o s t U D R F P P ........................... 0866 Weapon Section Base WSB .......................................... 0867 A l t e r n a t i v e W S B .................................................... 0868 SECTION 3 - NBCD STATE 2 ORGANISATION S t a t e 2 C o n s i d e r a t i o n s ................................................ 0881 S u s t a i n e d P e r i o d s a t S t a t e 2 ............................................ 0882 M a i n t e n a n c e o f R e a d i n e s s ............................................. 0883 Employment of Personnel ............................................. 0884 C o m m u n i c a t i o n s .................................................... 0885 ANNEXES Annex A HQ1 Information Boards and Control Documentation Annex B Incident Boards Annex C Example of Command State Board Annex D Example of Command Briefing Board Annex E Example of Weapons State Board Annex F Example of Sensors State BoardUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-3 Change 3CHAPTER 8 NBCD COMMAND AND CONTROL SECTION 1 - ACTION ORGANISATION 0801. This chapter describes the NBCD command a nd control organisation in a fully manned warship, at sea, in a war environment. The damage control and firefighting DCFF aspectsare also applicable to peacetime incidents wh ich would require impleme ntation of Emergency Stations. The procedures are based on a ship of DDFF size, but can easily be adapted to other vessels. Guidance on the NBCD State 2 organisati on is provided in Section 3 of this Chapter. 0802. The Command Team At the top of the NBCD Command Team, is the CO who is supported by the Command Adviser in the Ops Room WEO and the Action NBCDO in HQ1 MEO. These two maintaina liaison using a hot line hardwired communi cations link, which provides the Action NBCDOs only link with the Command. Th is link is essential to a. Continuously monitor the damage picture and assess the implications. b. Maintain a close liaison with each other, keeping each other aware of the internal and external picture. c. Set and review agreed priorities for damage repair teams which will maximise achievement of the Command Aim. d. Discuss and agree requests for manpower re-allocation, seeking Command approval as required. CO XO Command Adviser WEOANBCDO MEO DWEO DCOL PM DCO Fig 8-1. The Command Team 0803. The Command Aim The Command Aim is derived from the pre-eminent principle of war, identification and maintenance of the aim. The Commanding O fficer CO should set the Command Aim to bind together the efforts in all Warfare environments, be they external NBC, ASW, AAW, ASuWor internal DCFF. The CO must express his aim in a single clearly focussed sentence. ThisBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-4 UK RESTRICTEDshould then be transmitted through the command and control chain in two ways direct to the WEO in the CO-WEO discussions, for onward transmission to the MEO and DWEO and also by the CO, or PWO, via main broadcast during sitreps to the Ships Company. Although only one sentence, the Command Aim should contain su fficient information to make incident and equipment priorities readily apparent to members of the NBCD Command Team. Thewidespread knowledge of the Command Aim will allow use of command by veto, improving leadership efficiency and avoiding overload. 0804. Command Adviser The role of Command Adviser will normally be filled by the WEO. His position in the Ops Room is a node on the DC telling line see Ch apter 9, not only to receive information, but also for the input of DCFF information whic h may be fed to the Ops Room from other areas such as the bridge, flight deck or weapon cr ews. WEO mans Command Open Line to monitor the external battle and the tactical situation, and to pass high prio rity information quickly to the CO and the warfare team. WEOs briefings to the CO must be appropriately timed within thetactical situation and the format of the brief should be agreed beforehand with the CO. Items should be briefed in overall ship priority order using a portable br iefing board and must include advice on courses of action, any change to th e Command Aim and the pr iorities derived from it, as well as fallback or reversi onary modes of operati on of damaged equipm ent. While weapon systems are often the highest priority, the br ief must include DCFF, propulsionsystems and casualty and logistics information. The WEO is supported by an assistant, a junior engineer officer or a senior rating, who must have good knowledge of whole-ship mechanical and electrical systems in addition to weapon and se nsors. The assistant will manage the overall picture and maintain the Command Stateboar d, also providing direction to the WSB in accordance with WEOs aims and policy. 0805. To assist him in collating information, the Command Adviser has, at his position in the Ops Room a. A Command State Board, an exampl e of which is at Annex 8C. b. An Incident Board, reflecting the board in HQ1.c. A Command Briefing Board. This is a portable board to allow the WEO to take a concise brief to the Command. An example is at Annex 8D. d. A Casualty State Board. This is to indicate the name, rate, location, position and type of injury of all casualties. This board should have a cover to protect the information. 0806. Action NBCDO ANBCDO The role of ANBCDO, which is normally filled by the MEO, is coordinator of the HQ1SCC team to achieve cohe sive progress towards the Co mmand Aim. His responsibilities are listed in Chapter 2. It is essential that he keeps an overall view of all DCFF, NBC,electrical repair and propulsion incidents, while delegating authority to make full use of the specialists around him.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-5 Original0807. The ANBCDO must decide on movements of personnel from less to more hard pressed areas and give the necessary orders. He als o, if necessary, requests assistance through the Command from quarters who may have hands to spare. He must advise the Command on any restrictions, eg in speed, which may need to be imposed. If damage is accompanied by NBCcontamination, or the threat of contamination, the situation facing the ANBCDO is more complicated. For example, the ship would be in condition Alfa, hands may be in shelter positions see BR 21702 and the citadel may be breached. The NBC Protection Officer must be consulted to assess the hazard to personnel. Actions to deal with fire and flood must take precedence and NBC countermeasures ma y be limited by this requirement. 0808. Command Rover The XO fulfils a Command Rover function, pr oviding essential support to the Command Adviser WEO, the Action NBCDO and the DCO, in providing an expert audit of the overall picture and a Command level physical link be tween the Command Team and the scenes of incidents. He brings to bear a high level of leadership and decision-making at the scenes ofaction to overcome communication di fficulties or differences in interpretation. His tasks include a. Roving as directed by th e Action NBCDO or DCO to act as their eyes and ears. b. Extracting the maximum information from each damage scene.c. Assessing whether any damage scene is under control and taki ngdirecting remedial action. d. Checking the quality of information fl ow between all command nodes Ops Room, Bridge, WSB, HQ1, FRPPs, MHQ and eliminating confusion. e. Keeping abreast of the tactical picture and the Command Aim and disseminating this information maintaining imp etus and morale about the ship. f. Contributing to the Command Huddle in HQ1 when possible. 0809. The XO may be on the bridge at the time of damage. Having ensured that the Bridge Team have made the in itial damage report, the Rover should head for the most damaged area of the ship if this is apparent. As well as inci dents, FRPPs and HQ1, peri odic visits should be made to the Ops Room and bridge to gather a tacti cal update, not forgetting to update incident boards in these locations. This should allow the XO to assume conduct s eamlessly if the CO is incapacitated. Arrival in HQ1 should be a nnounced XO in HQ1! and DCO should then be briefed, with ANBCDO listening, ensuring the Incident Board Operator IBO plots the information. If incidents vis ited are under control, the Rover should ensure the impetus is maintained throughout the re grouping and restowing phase. 0810. Directors of Internal Warfare The next element of the Command Team are those who will actually direct and coordinate the damage repair ac tivity. The directors of internal warfare are the Damage Control Officer DCO, Damage Control Officer E lectrical DCOL and Propulsion Manager PM all in HQ1, and the DWEO in the Weapon Section Base. Their aim is to achieve an effective recovery from the damage by acting in accordance with the priorities and instructions given toBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-6 UK RESTRICTEDthem by the WEO and MEO, ensuring that these priorities are the focus of activity at the scenes of incidents. The tasks of thes e directors overlap in several areas and therefore it is essential that they communicate with each other. This is achieved by effective inter-desk liaison within HQ1,often using a chit system, and the green line between the WSB and HQ1 L desk. Ops CO Rm HQ1Command ANBCDO MEO Adviser WEO DWEO DCOL PM DCO WSB Fig 8-2. Ops RoomHQ1WSB Liaison 0811. Damage Control Officer DCO The DCO provides an assessment for the Ac tion NBCDO of the overall damage picture in the ship. He coordinates the efforts of the Fire and Repair Parties FRPs and medical teams. The damage picture is maintained using the Main Incident Board and its associated operatorIBO, who is linked to the incident boards at all the command nodes both FRPPs, Ops Room, WSB and AHQ by the DC telling line. DCO is also directly responsib le for the management of essential services in support of the DC effort ventilation, fire main, eductors etc and he will need to liaise with DCOL and PM to achieve this. DCO directs the actions of the FRPs in amanagement and coordination task, identifying and prioritising incidents and maximising the useof his personnel and materi al resources, or identifying when re sources must be re-allocated. His priorities may lie in dea ling with incidents, or in incident boundary management, or in containing incidents to allow other damage repair tasks to be carried out . The Logistics Support Cell see Para 1208 is under the control of the DCO, but will normally liaise dire ctly with the repair teams. Similarly, the Medical Headquarters see Para 1304 w ill liaise directly with various control positions. DCO FRPP FwdMedical HQFRPP Aft FAP FwdFAP Aft Fig 8-3. DCFF Incident ManagementUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-7 Original0812. Damage Control Officer Electrical DCOL The DCOL is responsible for the integrity of the main electrical power system and converted supplies. His team must quickly bu ild an accurate picture of damage to electrical services and the effect on key sy stems. DCOL then directs th e electrical and switchboard teams in their repair efforts using the dedicated communications net green line to the switchboards and the Electrical Repair Teams. DCOL has a key liaison function, both to the WSB via the green line and inter-desk within HQ1. DCOL SwitchboardsElectrical RepairTeams Fig 8-4. Electrical Damage Repair Management 0813. Propulsion Manager PM The PM is located in HQ1SCC. He must maximise propulsion and key ships systems to the Command by overseeing the actions of watchkeepers and machinery space crews, anddirecting the actions of the Mobile Repair Party. He coordinates the reactions to damage of thepropulsion plant and then directs repair efforts to maximise the return of propulsion to the Command in accordance with the priorities set for him by the Action NBCDO. He has broadcast communications with machinery spaces and a dedicated line to the Mobile Repair Party, whichis deployed as required by him to assist in machinery space incidents. He must ensure machineryspace fire and fl ood information is plotted on the Main Incident Board in HQ1, as this information needs to reach all command nodes. Propulsion Manager The Engineering WatchMobile Repair PartyMachinery Space Crews Fig 8-5. Propulsion ManagementBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-8 UK RESTRICTED0814. Officer in Charge of the Weapon Section Base OIC WSB The OIC WSB is normally the DWEO. He coordinates and dir ects the Weapon Repair Team WRT made up of WE senior ratings, disper sed at strategic locations throughout the ship. To assist him he will have a small team in the WSB, normally including both CCWEAs. TheWSB task is to build and validate the weapon a nd sensor damage pictur e and pass it to the WEO in the Ops Room, with appropriate assessments. The WSB is on the NBCD telling line tomonitor fires and floods and allow it to organise efforts to assist establishment of fire and flood boundaries. It also continuously monitors the Co mmand Open Line by speaker in order to keep abreast of the tactical situation. DWEO has a hot line to the Command Adviser position in the Ops Room. DWEO Charge Chief WEAPONSCharge Chief SENSORS WRT WRT WRT WRT WRT WRT WRT WRT Fig 8-6. Weapon Section - Base Management 0815 Command Huddles The Command Huddle is an assessment tool which may be used in HQ1 by the ANBCDO and his key advisers. Its purpose is to determine whether the Command Aim can be sustained, to assign incident priorities in support of it and fo cus the management of these priorities. The Huddle should begin with a statement by the ANBCDO of the Command Aim and WEOs top three weapon repair priorities. Each desk then gives a short brief summarising the desk picture in priority order and offering estimated repair times. This is then followed bya summary from the ANBCDO confirming or otherwise the desk priorities and stating theoverall ship priorities a nd a reminder of the Command Aim. Th e target time for a Huddle is 2-3 minutes 30 seconds for each desk and XO if present and 30 seconds for the ANBCDO to introduce and conclude. 0816. ANBCDO should give a 1-2 minute warning fo r the Huddle, allowing his directors to chase updates and assess their pr iorities. The Huddle should only be disturbed by other HQ1 personnel for Flash messages. XO should participate in the Huddl e if present, interrupting to correct briefs if required and gi ving an update after the three directors have completed their briefs. The Command Huddle will invariably dictate where the Rove r should head next. 0817. The Bridge Team The Bridge Team is often in a unique positi on and indeed may provide the first notice of an attack and make the BRACE pipe. Afte r damage the bridge can supply vital information on the type of damage and area of impact. In order to do this, someone must be nominated to watch the aircraftmissiletorpedo while others avert their eyes. This information s hould then be UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-9 Change 1broadcast as soon as possible afte r STAND TO, preferably on main broadcast if available, and backed up on the AHQ Incident Board Operat ors communications line and on Command Open Line. A good description of the incident is e ssential, to provide guidance to personnel below decks, eg Bomb through focsle port side and large explosi onno explosion seen. 0818. Following action damage, initial reactions must concentrate on ship safety. This will invariably mean dealing with any propulsion and steering defects first the Action OOW must know instinctively the initial actions for steer ing failures and Emergency SlowStop, including the override drill. If a propulsion defect and st eering failure are indicated simultaneously, then the Navigating Officer NO should be ready to a ssist by dealing with one of the breakdowns on the OOWs behalf, or detail an appropriate person to help. The level of involvement from the NO in these reactions will depend heavily on the navigational situation. In open water the NO will be immediately available to take an active role, whereas in constrained waters, such as aswept channel, the needs of navigational safe ty may prevent the NO from direct involvement. Whatever the case, rapid restoration of propul sion and steering in the highest control state available is essential, particularly when in confined waters, in order to achieve the CommandAim. 0819. After any immediate actions, Mini-SOCS must be initiated if not already in progress. Engineering defects should be monitored clos ely. After the immediate actions have been conducted, a concise brief on the problem and estimated time to re pair should be obtained. For steering defects, a report on the status of power supplies to each motor and control system should be given. A running tally of defects should be kept, which s hould include Estimated Time Back On Line ETBOL, in order to allow the OOW to assist in maintaining the drive to restoremachinery. There must be frequent liaison between the bridge and SCCMCR to ensure thatmomentum is not lost, as well as keepin g the Ops Room aware of the key points. 0820. Fire and Repair Parties Section Bases and FRPPs are pivotal to the success of NBCD, and the OfficerRating in Charge must ensure that the team is fully c onversant with their individual responsibilities, and that all equipment and documentation is at a high standard. Manning levels should be inaccordance with the Quarter Bill to achieve the righ t balance of expertise. Documentation should include the following as a minimum a. Manning check list.b. Full check list for State 1 preparations.c. A set of Kill Cards for compartments covered by the FRP. d. Full set of smoke clearance plans.e. Electrical underground maps.f. Set of aides memoire.g. FRPP locker layout BR 21703 plastic ised and stuck to reverse of door.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-10 UK RESTRICTEDh. Clear and accurate set of closing down cards. i. Briefing cards for DC Patrols.j. Dispersal plan for FRPP Team members.k. Briefing cards for Boundary Coolers. 0821. The role of leading a Fire and Repair Part y is a dynamic and responsible position. From here raw information is fed up through the lines of communication so that HQ1 can manage the whole-ship NBCD effort effectively. The acti ons to deal directly with fires and floods are normally well known and understood. However the management of boundaries can be critical in maintaining the Command Aim. In addition to the containment of a fire by boundary cooling, limitation of the spread of smoke using well-controlled smoke boundari es is a separate task and can be more vital. The rapid establishmen t of flood boundaries can be the key factor in indicating to the ANBCDO whether the Command Aim theme needs to switch from Fight toSurvive. In establishing boundaries, priority should be given to protecting the command nodes and those compartments linked to the achieveme nt of the Command Aim. Indeed, DCO may allocate a boundary as the top priority for a FRP eg Prevent the smoke from reaching the Ops Room. 0822. The 2 IC must rove between section incident s and the FRPP, feeding to the IBO and the FRPP Leader the relevant information, incident location, type and size, actions in hand and name of the incident manager, bounda ry management status, and hi s opinion on whether the incident is under control. He must physically return to the FRPP at regular intervals to update the OIC, view the incident board and check that the picture is correct. 0823. The leader directs operations at the FRPP, controlling the quality of information r eceived and questioning that which is doubtful. His specific tasks include the management of his personnel, equipment, fixed firefighting syst ems and HPSW, seeking authorisation from HQ1 where required. He must use the Command Aim, threat warnings and allocated priorities toshape the way he drives incidents within the sec tion. This may mean re-e ntry actions are delayed while weapon or L repair teams carry out ta sks, sometimes within a smoke boundary using BA. 0824. The tendency to relax must be avoided until post incident actions are complete. There are 4 principal tasks a.Smoke Clearance. The clearance of smoke must be thought of early and the plan discussed with and authorised by HQ1. Th e smoke route must be known and as with smoke boundaries, sentries must be placed to control the route and protect other personnel. b.RestowReplenish. Check and restow equipment, recharge BA and extinguishers, to ensure everything is ready for immediate use. c.Regroup. Account for all team members, re -disperse and provide drinks where required, particularly for fearnought teams. d.Restore. Restoration of watertight and gastight integrity.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-11 Change 10825. Composition of a Fire and Repair Party The recommended composition given belo w is based on the number of personnel available for NBCD duties in a fully-manned DDFF. To maximise NBCD training exposure theOICs of FRPPs should be DMEO and Captain s SecSASO or OOW3 where no Captains Sec is borne. In smaller ships it will be necessa ry to make adjustments to the numbers while retaining the overall concept of the organisation the tasks given in the Recommended Dutycolumn must be the guide to the manning requirement. The organisation is equally applicableto a Fire and Repair Party in a large ship. Manning Recommended Duty Officer An ME branch senior ratingAn able rateOverall charge of the Fire and Repair Party 2nd ic FRPCommunications SeniorLeading rate LMEM Able rates 2 Able rates 2 In charge of the Fire Party 2nd ic Fire Party in ch arge of Repair Party Firesuitmenas required for repair Fire back-upas required for repair Able rate Able rateAble rateAble rateAble ratePumping and leakstoppingas required Pumping and leakstoppingas requiredPumping partyas requiredPumping partyas requiredPumping partyas required MEL senior rating ME leading rate ME able rate Able rate any g63 ME able rate Able rate any g63 In charge of electrical repairas required 2nd ic electrical repairas required Working pairas required Working pairas required 0826. DCFF Patrols When a ship is closed up in NBCD State 1 or 2, patrols should be detailed from the Fire and Repair Partie s to patrol specified routes. They are responsible for ensuring that watertight and gastight openings conform to the NBCD condition set and for ma intaining a continuous watch for fire hazards and isolated incidents. To enable minor leaks to be tackled immediatelyeach rating carries a patrol bag containing softwood wedges, bungs and a hammer. Eachpatrolling rating should also carry a torch and an ELSA. For their own safety and to facilitate reporting, each patrol should consis t of two ratings whose duties are a. To visit all compartments and spaces on their nominated route and report any incidents.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-12 UK RESTRICTEDb. To look for signs of flood, fire, machin ery overheating, malf unction or electrical failure and to apply the correct drill for entering compartments in which damage mayhave occurred. When an incident is discove red one rating must report the fact to the FRPPSection Base by the quickest possible means, while the other tackles the incidentusing the material in the patrol bag, or ot her equipment to hand, aided by the first rating once his report has been made. As soon as the incident is taken in hand by the repair or fire party, the patrol resumes its patrolling duties, unless ordered otherwise. 0827. Dispersal of FRP Personnel and Bl anket Search when at NBCD State 1 A blanket search is a search carried out by all personnel not actively engaged at Action Stations to locate and identify action damage. The following is intended to amplify the dispersaland blanket search requirement s for personnel directly involve d in NBCD countermeasures at State 1 a. Fire and repair parties, after musterin g and completion of State 1 preparations, should be briefed and, at Threat Warning Red, be dispersed in pairs to nominated positions within each main sub-division of th eir sections. The identity and locations of the dispersed personnel should be recorded. b. The positioning of the dispersed personnel is to be influenced by the availability of suitable locations with means of escape and communications with the FRPP. The five-man firefighting team fearnought suitmen a nd the first-aid party within each section should be included in the paired dispersal. c. The fundamental starting point for buildin g a comprehensive action damage picture is a well organised and coordi nated blanket search organisa tion. To achieve this aim, clear areas of responsibilities for blanket sear ching personnel must be defined. Also, to ensure that the blanket search routine is effective and comprehensive, personnel carrying out the searches must be aware of the search requirements. Initially this is achieved bysound training and good ship knowledge of FRP personnel. However, to assist personnel in their task, they should be issued with pictorial blanket search route cards. These should detail the route to be taken, a nd what to look for. Blanket search cards should not be too large, A5 size is ideal. They should be plastic laminated and copies should be retained at each FRPP and HQ1. d. A blanket search must be carried out as soon as an attack has ceased. When the order STAND TO is broadcast by the Co mmand, this should be closely followed by a broadcast from the DCO ALL POSITIONS CARRY OUT BLANKET SEARCH.There will be occasions when, due to acti on damage, personnel will have to use their discretion in deciding when to commence their blanket search. The search, both upwards and downwards, within the nominated section must be quick and efficient, carrying out the indicator test plug drill where necessary. e. When an incident is discovered, one of the search party must report the facts location of incident, type, fire, flood, electrical, etc to the FRPPSection Base by the quickest possible means, while the other tackles the incident to the best of his ability,aided by the first person once the report has been made.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-13 Change 2f. The search party must stay at the scene of the incident until relieved by a team sent from the FRPPSection Base and then resume its search unless instructed otherwise. g. The officer or senior rating in charge of the FRPPSection Base should, on receiving reports from a blanket search party, tick th e areas searched and mark up the incidents reported on his incident board, thereby quickly compiling a visual picture of the damagewithin the section. h. The five-man firefighting team fearnought suitmen shoul d not take part in the blanket search and should be instantly av ailable to tackle any fire discovered. i. The spirit of this dispersal policy should also apply to other groups of personnel not manning essential action e quipment at NBCD State 1. 0828. Machinery Operating Team The prime objective of the Marine Engineer Officer of the Watch MEOOW at Action is to maintain and maximise th e availability of propulsion power . He should also support and advise the PM as necessary. He should use th e MMS Action Crews to augment the information from within the SCC, sustain maximum power to the Command equipments should not be shut down prematurely, provide innovative means of re storing power, and try to provide the PM with accurate and appropriate in formation. He may often be the firs t to hear of machinery damage and must collate all information and demand a full picture before briefing PM or liaising withDCOL. 0829. The main distribution system should be operated from the secondary switchboards exempt T23s. This reduces the manning in the SCCMCR and ensures that any load transferscan be carried out using manual operation of break ers if necessary, without the need to close up additional personnel. It should release one seni or rating to act as Controls Rover. The switchboard operators should reconf igure as necessary keeping him informed. DCOL must be prepared to put cable running teams into BA in order to achieve a high priority task, see Chapter 19. 0830. Main Machinery Space Action Crews are responsible to the MEOOW. If the space is manned, one Senior Ra te plus one Junior Rate should be the minimum. The controlling engine room should be run by an MEOOW1 qualified pe rson and other engine rooms by an MEOOW2 qualified person. Action Cr ews must be capable of operating a ll systems in reversionary modes where applicable and have a good knowledge of other spaces. On closing up they will conduct State 1 preparations and will c onduct blanket searches when orde red. Action Crews will benefit from on-site Table Top discussions on how th ey will conduct their business and what the PM needs. 0831. Mobile Repair Party MRP The MRP will vary in strength depending on the ship class - generally a minimum of 2 CPOs CMEM and ADHULL, a PO and 2 can be achieved. However, MRP size will be balanced by the number of personnel that are a llocated to the MMS Action Crews. The MRP is under the control of the Propulsion Manager a nd a good line of communication is essential. Whilst the MRP will generally be used to provide assistance to the MMS Action Crews,ANBCDO may require their expertise outside the MMSs hullstructure repair and systemreconfiguration are examples, or even calling for stores. The MRP needs to be effectivelyequipped, including immersion suits , and have access to the Ramset tool, thermal lance, cuttingBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-14 UK RESTRICTEDand spreading equipment and toolbags. The MR P may be used to deal with a wide range of incidents. A good level of ship and system know ledge are essential along with being well versed in DCFF include GT module re -entry techniques and a vari ety of hull and system repair techniques. They may also need to use breat hing apparatus, so a BA Controller is to be nominated for them. 0832. Weapon Repair Organisation An efficient weapon repair team requires good organisation and careful preparation as well as the education and traini ng of weapon repair personnel a nd operators. The organisation of weapon repair partie s is illustrated in Fig 8-7. The obj ectives of the organisation are to a. Advise the Command on the material state of the ships equipment and the ships ability to survive and fight before and after action damage. b. Monitor, maintain and repa ir weapon equipment in Acti on and at Defence Stations, and Cruising Watches. c. Combat battle damage as an integral part of the NBCD organisation. Command ANBCDO liaison Operations Room WEO Command Adviser Damage XO Assistant liaison Command Rover NBC Organisation and Incident Board operator Reports and Reports Damage control and reports info HQ1 AHQ ANBCDO DCO DCOL NBCPOA Supply losses Weapon Section Base Alternative WSB and DWEO Updating damage liaison and Team Control Damage Reports Repair Posts Weapon Repair Personnel Outstations Fig 8-7. Weapon Re pair OrganisationUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-15 Original0833. The Weapon Section Base WSB The functions of the Weapon Section Base are a. Providing an information centre, holdi ng information on equipment, supplies, critical routines and present conditions and advising the WEO as required. b. Receiving and recording reports from the Operations Room, HQ1, Repair Posts and weapon repair personnel. c. Organising weapon repair personnel at action and during Defe nce Watches, paying particular attention to the completion of rounds. d. Maintaining communications with weapon repair personnel. e. Interpreting the Command Aim received from the WEO and initiating any actions required of the wea pon repair personnel. f. Interpreting equipment state reports in terms of their effect on the ships fighting characteristics and advising the WEO. g. Interpreting necessary changes to revers ionary or emergency modes of operation in terms of effect on the ships fightin g characteristics and advising the WEO. h. Initiating weapon repair as the need arises and weapon maintenance as the opportunity occurs. j. Advising the WEO of any deterior ation of weapon equipment performance. k. Advising the WEO when an essential check or routine is overdue and weapon performance standard can no longer be guaranteed. l. Informing the WEO of the options of repair and any associated penalty after failure of, or damage to, weapon systems. m. Advising the WEO on explosives risk.n. Providing technical advice and back up as the need arises. o. Liaising with the stores departme nt to provide spares as required. p. Liaising with HQ1 to ensure 1 The effects of damage on weapon systems or their supplies are identified quickly. 2 HQ1 receives damage reports from weapon repair personnel. 3 HQ1 is aware of damage to weapon system supplies and support services and the actions required to meet the Command Aim.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-16 UK RESTRICTED4 The deployment and use of weapon repair personnel in meeting the Command Aim allows for the current damage state. 5 The Command Stateboard and the Inci dent Board in the WSB are kept up to date. q. Updating the Alternative Weapon Section Ba se to allow for the easy transfer of control when required. r. Advising weapon repair pe rsonnel of damage which coul d effect them or their equipment. 0834. Tasks of Weapon Repair Personnel The tasks of weapon repair pe rsonnel deployed in direct support of weapon systems and equipment under the direction of the WSB are a. Maintaining communication with the WSB and ensuring the WSB is aware of their movements. b. Monitoring the performance standards of the equipment. c. Monitoring the availability of all forms of normal, alternative and emergency supplies and support services. d. Advising operators and the WSB of any changes in equipment performance. e. Advising operators on the need to carry out SOCS or mini SOCs, assisting them as required, ie periodically, when the ship has been subject to shock or damage, and when the equipment has been returned from repair. f. Advising or assisting operators on an y adjustment required to meet changing environmental conditions. g. Carry out routine maintenance when due, a nd when the opportunity or threat allows. h. Carrying out repairs as the need arises, informing the WSB of progress and of any limitations imposed by the repair. i. Call for technical support from the WSB when required.j. Checking the equipment areas conform to the NBCD condition set as directed by the WSB. k. Locating damage contro l facilities and support stor es in equipment area. l. Checking equipment areas for damage after the ship has been hit or subject to shock and reporting the effects to the WSB.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-17 Originalm. Identifying hazardous materi als or conditions in the e quipment areas and taking or advising the appropriate safety measures when damage control actions or repairs are in hand. n. Act in support of the damage control organisation as directed by the WSB. o. Carry out rounds in Action or Defe nce States as required by the WSB. 0835. The manning of the weapon repair organisa tion must be commensurate with the task. The reduced staff available during Defence Watche s has to be capable of advising the Command, monitoring and maintaining weapon equipmen t and communications whilst initiating repair action, calling out the appropriate section senior rating as re quired. Weapon re pair personnel, allowing for the task, should be deployed as wide ly as possible to reduce the vulnerability of the organisation to action injuries. Specialist mainta iners should not keep formal watches but remain as daymen, available at any time, unless a. There are duplicate experts for an equipment.b. The maintainers have an operator function. Table 8-1. Deployment of Key WE Personnel Action Stations Defence WatchesCruising WatchesPeacetime Emergency Operations RoomCommand Adviser. Assistant.Incident boardOperator.Larger ships CVS T42 Section OfficerSection Officer, CCWEA or othersenior rating asWE manager forall major serialsWEO and his Assistant willclose up withCaptain, usuallyon the BridgeOther Ships CCWEA Weapon SectionBaseDWEO. CCWEAsIBO.Command StateBoard operator.MessengerLarger Ships The base of the on- watch CCWEANot normally manned. Computerwatchkeeper maybe present insome ships.CCWEAs WE ratingsnominated asOOQsOther ships Nominated WE ratings HQ1 DWEOWSO. 0836. Damage Reports All reports must be made in the first instance to the Fire and Repair Party PostSection Base, from where it will be reported to HQ1SCC in a large ship, where an officer is in chargeof a Section Base, the initial reports must be carefully filtered and a concise report made toHQ1SCC. Every incident must be reported to HQ1SCC, but not necessarily all the detail. Thetypes of report required are a. First reports from any source patrols, s earch parties, Command, machinery control room, electrical control positions, Ships Company of incidents discovered, eg structural damage, flood, fire, damage to electrical or other se rvices and casualties.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-18 UK RESTRICTEDb. Reports from search parties on the extent of damage and, if po ssible, more detail regarding loss of services and the aid considered necessary. c. Reports from fire parties on the nature a nd extent of fire and, if possible, the location of the seat of fire. d. Reports of failure or disr uption of electrical services. e. Reports from electrical control positions giving an initial assessment of the effects of damage on electrical power and equipment electrical damage affecting only weapons may be reported direct to the WEO in the Operations Room. f. Reports from the Machinery Control Room giving loss or reduction of main and important auxiliary machinery. g. In a CVS or LPH, from the hangar and flight deck control positions giving all necessary detail on major incidents. Table 8-2. Information Required by Action NBCDO not in order of priority Type of Information Information Supplied by Method Type of attack expected, eg current threat.Command Telephone Imminence of attack, eg missile launch, coming within range.CommandOOW Telephone or broadcast Engaged side applicable mainly to larger ships.CommandOOW Telephone or broadcast Information on hits andor near missesOOW andor OOQ of exposed weaponsBroadcast or via armamentcommunications Priorities for power or repair. Command Telephone Detection of chemical spra y attack. OOW andor OOQ of exposed weaponsBroadcast Nearby air or surface nuclear burst. OOWCommand Broadcast take cover Defects, eg power failure, steering breakdown.Operations room, OOW, etc.Telephone or conningUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-19 Change 1Table 8-3. Information Required by the Command Type of Information Information Supplied by Method Restrictions on manoeuvrability or speed imposed by mechanicalelectrical damage,structural damage or fire.HQ1 Action NBCDO Telephone Course to assist da mage control operations or reduce smoke nuisance.HQ1 Action NBCDO Telephone Defects affecting ability to employ countermeasures, eg pumps for prewetting,citadel defects.HQ1 Action NBCDO Telephone Limitations on ability to employ weapons systems caused by defects, damage orcontamination, including delays in reaction caused by contamination.HQ1 Action NBCDO Ops Room WEOTelephone In person Power failure to any system. HQ1 Action NBCDO Telephone Damage affecting any system . HQ1 Action NBCDO Telephone Serious numbers of casualties or impending radiation casualties among personnelserving any system or main machinery, orin NBCD parties which may needreinforcement from other quarters.HQ1 Action NBCDO Telephone Need to shelter or deep shelter HQ1 NBCPO Telephone Requirement for decontamcleansing, eg additional loading of cleansing station.HQ1 NBCPO Telephone Time likely to elapse before restrictions stated above can be lifted, and progress reports as necessary.HQ1 NBCPO Telephone Progress in watch changes and similar movements of personne l across the citadel boundary.HQ1 NBCPO Telephone Amplifying reports on the general situation and casualties.HQ1 Action NBCDO, XOTelephone or in person 0837. Follow-up Reports Early reports should be followed by more de tailed reports as soon as the information is available. These follow-up reports may amplify or correct previous repor ts andor specify new areas of damage. Brief statements concerning casualties should be included. As soon as the NBCD parties are working to cont rol or repair damage or to fight fire, HQ1SCC must be kept informed of the actions being taken, the numbe rs of hands involved, the progress being made towards the containment of the incident and the floodfire boundaries that have been established. All this information must be recorded in HQ1SCC mainly on the incident board.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-20 UK RESTRICTED0838. Narrative of Events A full HQ1 narrative of events is to be kept in all NBCD State 3 incidents, either by the Incident Board Operator on his board or at some other suitable position in HQ1. 0839. Incident Assessment by the Command Rover The following questions will help the Command Rover to assess incidents AT THE INCIDENT SCENE FIRES FLOODS Where is the seat? Where is the dama ge ships side, deckhead or deck and what type splinter hol es, fractured pipes etc? What type of fire oil basedcarbonaceous?What is the level of water? Is it risingfallingsteady? Which team is attacking it and with what?Is the flood contaminated? How long before re-entry if applicable?Has initial leak stopping taken place? What hazards are in the vicinity? A re pumping requirements in place? Are there casualties? Are they being dealt with? Is there an incident manager? What is the firesmokeflood boundary status? Which boundaries are priorities? Is the incident under control? AT THE FRPP Are incidents shown correctly? Are boundaries shown correctly? When are reliefs due in? What other incidents are there in the section? Does the OIC have the right priorities? Does the OIC have things under control? 0840. In order to gain this information the Co mmand Rover must get as close as possible to an incident. For a flood this includes sightin g the damage. Additional information should be gathered, for example the state of lighting in the ship. There is a lot to take in and good use of pocket size deck plans and a ides memoire are essential. 0841. Standard Operating Procedures SOP SOPs allow regular practice to develop instinctive reactions which are less likely to become degraded by the confusion of battle or peacetime incident. Some examples of SOPs are a. Firefighting.b. Machinery breakdown drills.c. Mini SOCs.d. Blanket searches.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-21 Change 30842. Mini-SOCs and blanket searches are the SOPs used to ensure that the extent of damage is accurately established. There are 2 key ar eas which must be included in this process a.Damage Boundary. Precise determination of inci dent boundaries is vital to the Command and Control process. For a fire or flood, high value compartment boundaries should be established first. For an equipm ent defect, the exact boundaries of the damage are required, or the report will be almost worthless. This includes whether theequipment is repairable, whic h power supplies are unavailabl e and whether faults are in cables or breakers, what functionality still remains and what reversionary modes areavailable. If the exact nature of the def ect is not known, then a report of, investigating, sitrep at minute .... is much more useful than no report. b.Implications. Once the damage boundary is estab lished, the task of assessing the implications is straightforward, using the Command Aim and an awareness of the ThreatState. For these, the significance of the incident should be readily apparent. 0843. Estimated Time Back on Line ETBOL Control positions, such as HQ1 and WSB s hould be given an estimate of the time at which damaged equipments and se rvices will be back on line. ETBOLs should always be used on Command Stateboards and are always expressed as an absolute time, ie 1145, or minute 45, never as the repair duration. If it is difficult to provide an ETBOL, then either a best guess should be given or, if s till investigating, then a time to the next sitrep. 0844. NBCD Command and Control Communications The NBCD communications systems are detailed in Chapter 9. They will vary between large and small ships, but Fig 8-8 shows the links in a typical DDFF. 0845. NBCD Communication Procedures Much confusion is created in action or p eacetime incidents throug h the misinterpretation of common terms, and the failure to recognise that busy internal communications circuits andlines require exactly the same kind of voice disc ipline as used on radio circuits. The flow of information often relies on a junior rating, of limited experience and possibly in a state of shock,finding a number of defects or incidents and then reporting them accurately to the appropriateoutstation. The scope for error is immense durin g this fast moving in itial phase. A mistaken incident or incomplete report can cause incidents to be incorrectly prioritised with potentiallycatastrophic effects on the fighting a nd operational efficiency of the ship. The process is further complicated by the sheer volume of information which needs to be assimilated amidst the chaoticenvironment following a weapon hit or damage incident. Fires, floods, smoke, violent manoeuvring, high pressure syst em leaks and noise all combine to add confusion and provides a breeding ground for poor communication and flaw ed decisions. This requires considerable forethought, practice and cr itical self-analysis by NB CD Command Team members. 0846. When operating under stress, Command and Cont rol discussions can be better focussed if leaders prefix sentences with key descriptive words, to tell the listener the type of messagebeing passed. The most important examples are Command Aim, Question, Order, Request Sitrep, Standby Sitrep, Inc ident Priorities. For example a. Question? Status of the 3 Juliet fire?BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-22 UK RESTRICTED Fig 8-8. NBCD Command Control and Communications Team for a Typical DDFFUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-23 Change 1b. Order! send a firefighting team from the Aft FRPP to support Ford. c. Standby Sitrep ........d. Incident Priorities! Your first priority fire in 3 Juliet. Your second ...... etc. 0847. All references to ship locati on letters should be by use of the phonetic alphabet to avoid misunderstanding eg Fire in Two November Galley. 0848. Initial Contact Report After a Loud Vocal Alarm is raised, the firs t leader at the scene eg WRT leader, MMS SR, fireflood team leader should make an In itial Contact Report ICR, following the What, Where, Whither and When format noting that Whither indicates whether the incident statusappears to be improving or worsening. The stat us of an incident should be qualified as follows a.Minor. Relatively small scale incident, whose solution is containable within local DCFF resources. b.Significant. Larger scale incident, which has the potential to affect key ships fighting and survival systems, but which is presently containable within local DCFF resources. c.Critical. Major incident which already prejudice s the survival of the ship or her key fighting systems. 0849. Defining the status is initially the role of the local NBCD team leader, who should take this decision bearing in mind the Command Aim. For example, if the Command Aim is toprovide goal keeping air defence, then an in cident fire, flood, smoke, power loss, equipment damage which affects Vertical Launch Sea Wolf c ould be Significant or Critical. The status will allow those higher up the Command chain, notably DCO and ANBCDO, to prioritiseresource allocation. When repor ted from FRPPSection Base leve l to HQ1, these reports may be qualified with an indication of whether extra assistance will be required. If none is requested then it will be assumed that the incident is containable within local resources. 0850. Flash Procedure Flash reports are designed to gain urgent attention of the Command Team. As such they must be used sparingly. The following occasi ons are usually the only ones where a Flash report will be appropriate a. ICR of a Critical or Significant incident. b. Sitrep of a Critical or Significant incident, especially where the situation is deteriorating. c. Change in the Command Aim, or broad incident priorities.d. Key system or equipment restored or brought back on line.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-24 UK RESTRICTED 0851. Message Chits A chit system should be used to improve in terdesk liaison in HQ1. The What, Where, Whither, When format recommended for ICRs is also ideal for chits. Chits may be made up asa tailored form, but the standard blank Post-It can be just as effective and has the advantage of being self-adhesive. 0852-0860. Spare. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-25 Change 1SECTION 2 - CONTROL POSITIONS 0861. HQ1 HQ1 should be sited in a position near the centre line, co-located with the ships electrical distributi on and machinery control centre. This combined space should be designated the Ship Control Centre SCC. For the purpose of integrated management, the SCC is designed to allow display and disseminati on of NBCD information, in conj unction with other systems, and must enable the Action NBCDO to control the various functions from a single position. The following should be provided in HQ1 a. The communications links specified in Chapter 9.b. NBCD information boards and control documentation, as deta iled in Annex 8A. c. A whole-ship NBCD Incident Board, as detailed in Annex 8B. d. Emergency lighting.e. A desk on which documents can be consulted.f. Fire, flood and NBC monitoring remote warning equipment. g. Main broadcast micr ophone and alarm buttons. h. Citadel pressure manometers, for each sub-citadel.i. Duplicate key stowage.j. Heel indicator.k. Pressure gauges, for each leg of the HPSW System.l. A clock.m. Stowage for NBCD documentation and may be left open tallies. 0862. Secondary NBCD Headquarters HQ2 In large ships with an HQ2, it should be separated from HQ1 by at least two main transverse bulkheads, and should be fitted with equipment and information boards in a manner similar to HQ1 to allow takeover should HQ1 be put out of action. In a ddition, it should be fitted with the necessary instruments and repeats to indicate the state of machinery and systems. 0863. Alternative NBCD Headquarters AHQ In DDFFs a fully provisioned HQ2 is not available. An AHQ is identified. In most ships the AHQ position will be on or near the bridge . An alternative whole-ship incident board which may be portable, or fixed if space permits, with a lockable cover, as appropriate, is fitted at this position and illuminated by low voltage, battery operated lighting. Communications links with HQ1, FRPPs, Ops Room and WSB must be available, along with copies of the more important control documents from Annex 8A Kill Cards and Smoke Clearance Plans in particular.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-26 UK RESTRICTED0864. Section Bases Section Bases in large ships should be site d on the deck that affords fire and repair parties the easiest fore and aft movement. They should be as we ll protected as possible by the ships structure and should be remote from the sh ip side. They should be in communication with their own outstations and with HQ1 and HQ2. Each section base should cont ain or be fitted with a. A whole-ship Incident Board.b. A Section Electrical Information Board.c. A Section HPSW System Board.d. A Section NBCD Door and Hatch Board.e. A Section Ventilation Board.f. Kill Cards for compartments in that Section. Note. Ships of DDFF size and below are single NBCD Section ships see Chapter 1. In these ships the role of the Section Base is subsumed into that of HQ1. 0865. Fire and Repair Party Posts FRPP These consist of grouped damage control, fire party and electrical repair party lockers, or combined built-in stowages, sited with communication with HQ1 and a manometer for citadelpressure. The following informa tion boards are required at FRPPs a. Whole-ship Incident Board.b. Whole-ship HPSW System Board. c. Whole-ship Electrical Information Board.d. Safety Plan RFAs only.e. The FRPP documentation listed at Para 0820. 0866. Upper Deck Re-entry Fire Party Post UDR FPP An UDRFPP is located on the upper deck of all DDFF sized vesse l T23 and subsequent vessels have a dedicated compartment within the superstructure. The Post comprises a stowagefor sufficient equipment to effect a re-entry in to the ship, should it be necessary to withdraw firefighters to the upper deck. Breathing appara tus and the TIC are susceptible to damage from exposure to weather, so they are sighted at sheltered, but easily accessible locations within thesuperstructure. 0867. Weapon Section Base WSB The information held in the WSB is the ba sis upon which action is taken. Information has to be presented in such a way that it is easily available and easily understood. Information boards should be equipped with emergency lighting and be portable to allow for easy transfer should the compartment have to be evacu ated. The material required includesUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-27 Change 2a. Weapon Section Base Handbook. b. State 1 Preparations Check-off List.c. Manpower control Board an example is at Fig 8-9.d. WSB Command State Board.e. Weapons and Sensors State Boards examples are at Annex 8E and 8F. f. A Whole-ship Incident Board.g. Weapon Repair Monitoring Card s an example is at Fig 8-10. h. WE Compartment Information Cards WE Kill Cards.i. System supporting documentation.j. Weapon machinery conditi ons for quiet states. k. Internal communica tions schematics. l. Misfire routines. m. Ordnance disposal routines. n. Watch and Station Bill. o. Sleeping locations of maintainers. p. Defence watch maintenance plan. q. System standards. r. CB 8844 - Weapon Effect effects of explosives on ships structure. s. WE Defect Book. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-28 UK RESTRICTED Name RankRate Action StationTelephone NumberTime of last Check inTime of next Check inNotesmovements Lt Cdr Operations Room 304 Lt Surveillance Office289CPO CPOCPOWEMRWTRCPO MCO 225 CPO CPO UAA1 252CPOTest and Assembly Magazine268 LWEMO LWEMOCPO Fwd Gyro Room 254CPO Fwd S.I.S. 269CPO Fwd tracker Office 305PO Fwd Launcher Office 261PO Aft Tracker Office 306 Fig 8-9. Example of WSB Manpower Control BoardUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-29 Change 3Line No EQUIPMENTMAINT INFORMEDETBOL DEFECT DESCRIPTION AND REPAIR ACTION Fig 8-10. Weapon Repair Monitoring Card 0868. Alternative WSB The alternative WSB should be large e nough to accommodate all WSB personnel with stateboards. the location of the alternative site will depend on the extent and location of damageor smoke. The final decision has to be made at the time. Two lo cations should be pre-designated to allow for flexibility. They are to be as for apart as practicable , and should be displaced laterally and verti cally from the main WSB and from each other. Ideally, the two spaces should have the communications indicated in Fig 9-1. 0869. Moving the WSB to its alternative location should be a pre-planned SOP. DWEO and CCWEAs should ensure that all personnel each w ith an ELSA are safely evacuated from the compartment, and as much portable equipm ent as possible is taken with them. 0870-0880. Spare.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-30 UK RESTRICTEDSECTION 3 - NBCD STATE 2 ORGANISATION 0881. State 2 Considerations NBCD State 2 should be considered if th e operational task requi res more personnel on watch than can be generated at State 3 or if th e external threat warrant s further precaution. When reviewing the State 2 posture, invariably utilising the Command Estimate process, the following factors should be included a. Likely threat weapon warning time. b. Typical reaction time for the ship to assume heightened NBCD postures, eg State 1 Condition Zulu from State 2 Condition Yankee. c. Required response to non-hostile incide nts, eg internal fire, collision. d. Successful maintenance of the State 2 postu re requires strength of leadership and teamwork which in turn relies heavily upon individual knowledge of ship, drills, procedures and systems incl uding reversionary modes of operation, eg when assuming Condition Zulu in an unfamiliar part of ship. e. The psychological importance of being at State 2, as opposed to State 3, should not be underestimated. State 2 provides a whol e-ship focus to the task in hand and subconsciously causes people to mentally prepare for combat and damage, however remote that possibility might be. State 3 is synonymous with peacetime cruising and encourages that mindset. Personnel may require days to mentally adapt to State 2 and the real possibility of combat and trauma. 0882. Sustained Periods at State 2 During a sustained period of State 2 operati ons, a more loosely and generically applied Command Aim may be appr opriate. Where the threat warnin g time allows sufficient reaction time for the ship to assume Action Stations, NBCD State 1 Condition Zulu should be adopted to counter battle damage. 0883. Maintenance of Readiness Where the threat warning time does not allo w sufficient reaction time for the ship to assume Action Stations, or clos ing down to Condition Zulu coul d interfere with movement of the Ships Company thereby hampering the ability to deal with a non-hostile incident a. State 2 Standard Operating Procedures SOPs must be promulgated and understood at all levels. Example State 2 SOP algorithms are at Figs 8-11 and 8-12. b. A Defence Watch Emergency Party DWE P, capable of reacting to a non hostile incident or battle damage , should be nominated for each Defence Watch. Where practicable, key State 1 personne l should not be allocated a role in the DWEP that is different from their role at State 1. An example of the composition of a DWEP is at Table 8-4. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-31 Change 3Table 8-4. Example of a DWEP HQ1 TEAM DCO ME ADVISER HQ1 WATCHKEEPER COMMSIBO ME ISOLATIONS CONTAINMENT IC CONT 1 CONT 2 KEYSCONT 3 PATROLCONT 4 PATROLCONT 5 CONT 6 EMERGENCY PARTY IC FCP ATTACK ATTACK ATTACK BA ATTACK BA SUPPORT PARTY IC SUPPORT Firefighter SUPPORT Waterwall SUPPORT Hose Tender SUPPORT Ship Protector BA CONTROLLER FIRST AID IC FA FA1 OPS ROOM IBO Notes 1. These positions are to be covered by both Port and Starboard Watches and some positions may have to be split into 1 st and 2nd Watches. 2. It is recommended that th e Containment Group muster at the nominated FRPP and use the FRPP Incident Board. This will allow an easier handover to the FRPP personnel if the ship goes to State 1. c. Ships should practise the various scenar ios so that key personnel can make the correct broadcast and personnel know th e right response for an incident. d. All personnel, partic ularly the DWEP, must be prep ared to fulfil unfamiliar roles. e. DWEP briefs, conducted at watch changes, must reinforce i ndividual and team roles, the need to respond instinctively a nd remain closed up a nd on task until relieved by State 1 personnel. f. HQ1 Watchkeepers must be fully conversan t with, and endorsed in the use of, HQ1 systems, communications and SOPs. g. Ships Company messing and accommoda tion should be reviewed to ensure personnel are dispersed as close as is practi cable to their Action Station thereby reducing movement and therefore time to achieve State 1. Sleeping in full AWD greatly assists individual protection and imp roves personnel response times. Implications of mine warnings on accommodation are also worthy of consideration. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-32 UK RESTRICTEDh. It is recommended that the DWP wear surcoats to enable easy identification in relieving State 1 personnel. i. To minimise the time accounting for pers onnel when assuming State 1, detailed DWEPState 1 personnel cr oss-reference muster lists are to be produced. Fig 8-11. Internal Incidents UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-33 Change 3 Fig 8-12. External Threat Notes 1. Personnel are to remain dispersed until S tand To is piped. The DWEP should then be piped to muster. Contrary to State 3 prac tice. DWEP Support teams should muster at the FRPP nearest the incident. There may be a requireme nt to pipe Hands to Action Stations but add Stand Fast, Brace, Brace, Brace prior to impact. 2. Where Action Stations are ordered to count er the internal, rather than the external, threat careful consideration should be given to a. Remaining at State 1 Condition Y. b. Employment of warfare personnel. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8-34 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANK UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8A-1 Change 3ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 8 HQ1 INFORMATION BOARDS AND CONTROL DOCUMENTATION 1.To assist the Command and Control team in HQ1 an outfit of information boards is to be provided in accordance with Naval Engineer ing Standard NES 119 and Table 8A-1 a. NBCD Incident board see Annex 8B.b. NBCD Command State Board see Annex 8C.c. Pumping and Flooding board DDFF and larger ships only. d. HPSW System Board.e. Fuel and Fresh Water State Board Multiple NBCD section ships only.f. NBCD Door and Hatch Board.g. NBCD Ventilation Board.h. NBC Protection Officers Inci dent and Information Boards. i. NBCD Electrical Information Board see Chapter 19. 2.In newer ships, these boards may be replaced by electronic displays. 3. Command State Board The HQ1 Command State Board, an example of which is at Annex 8C, is identical to the board maintained by the Command Adviser WEO in the Ops Room and by the DWEO in theWeapon Section Base. 4. Pumping and Flooding Board This board consists of a series of deck plan s up to at least the highest survivable static waterline. On it are shown the watertight subdivision of the shi p, and various stability data for each compartment if flooded. Each co mpartment is bordered as follows Green Watertight compartment Orange AVCAT Brown DIESO Blue Fresh and Sea Water Red Magazines Yellow Store rooms Silver grey Machinery Spaces 5.Each compartment may contain some of the fo llowing information. The effect on the heel and trim of the vessel when the compartment is filled and the cap acity of each compartment in tonnes of seawater. In addition the co mpartment may contain the change in GM F for the worst case scenario, it may also contai n information about other pumpi ng and flooding arrangements for that compartment, for exampl e the location of salvage eductors or cross flooding lines. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8A-2 UK RESTRICTED6.The information provided on the board gives guidance to the operator on the affects of various floods. Hence the board can be used to assess what counter flooding is required to recover from a damage incident and to provide guidance on how counter flooding might affect the available reserve of stability. The board is to be operated by the DCO, NBCDO or Command Stability Advisor large ships who must ha ve an intimate knowledge of the pumping and flooding arrangements of the ship. 7. HPSW System Board This board shows, in broad outline, the ships HPSW system. The numbering of isolating valves and hydrants is detailed in para 0333. Red pegs can be in serted in provided holes at the valve positions to indicate the valv es are shut. Green pegs can be inserted in provided holes at the pump positions to indicate the pum ps are running. Other colour pegs may be used to indicate, say, Pump defective or Valve defective. The board is opera ted under the supervision of the DCO. 8. Fuel and Fresh Water State Board The board is in the form of a tabular statement indicating clearly, in the case of fuel, the machinery units for which the tanks are providing. The stat ement should indicate a. 95 per cent capacity of each tank in tonnes and the location of the tank. b. State of tank at any given time and the time at which the state was last determined.c. Whether the tank is in use or standby. 9. NBCD Door and Hatch Board This board should include all the deck plans of the ship on which are shown a. The position of all watertight and gastig ht doors, hatches, manholes and access trunks with their location markings. b. The NBCD risk and control marking for each opening.c. The regulations for watertight and gas tight openings and the number of openings allowed to be open in each NBCD condition. Coloured pegs can be inserted to indicate the openings which are open at any given time and those pegs should be the predominant feature of the board.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8A-3 Change 110. NBCD Ventilation Board Fig 8A-1 The NBCD ventilation board is an essential aid for firefighting, smoke removal and watertight and gastight control, and is designed to enable us e by non-technical personnel. It consists of a series of deck plans showing the areas served by each supply, exhaust and conditioned-air system using colour codes of blue, scarlet and oran ge respectively. Each system is identified by the number of the fan or ATU serving it with directional arrows, indicating thedirection of air flow, adjacent to each fan number. Each compartment served by an ATU has itsboundaries delineated by a continuous orange line, and contains the number of the ATU serving it. The related tabular statement Fig 8A-2 is an integral part of the ventilation board. 11. NBC Protection Officers Information Boards These consist of a. A scaled down reproduction of the Main Incident Board.b. A Total Dose Record Board see Volume 2.c. A Dose Rate Graph see Volume 2.d. A Radiological Monitoring and D econtamination Board see Volume 2. e. A Chemical State Board see Volume 2. 12. NBCD Electrical Information Board This is maintained by the DCOL, as detailed in Chapter 19. 13. Kill Cards A full set of compartment Kill Cards, as detailed in Annex 21G, are to be readily available in HQ1. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8A-4 UK RESTRICTED Fig 8A-1. Example of Ventilation BoardUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8A-5 Change 3SUPPLY SERVICEEXHAUST EXTERNAL CLOSURE AND CONTROL MARKINGINTERNAL CLOSURESTARTER POSITION AND CONTROL MARKINGFAN SYSTEM NUMBERFAN SYSTEM NUMBERSTARTER POSITION AND CONTROL MARKINGINTERNAL CLOSUREEXTERNAL CLOSURE AND CONTROL MARKING 01 DECK 6465PA BV 2L GALLEY OS A 1J24 RATING GALLEY SERVERY AND SCULLERY 2L, FRIDGE SPACE PROV ROOM 3K RATING GALLEY AND SCULLERY 2L, FRIDGE SPACE, RATINGS DINING HALL1J26 2L GALLEY OSAB Y FIRE FLAP01 DECK 65p65PA HANGER 1J 1J15 01G PASSAGEA1 D E C K 5859SA NAFFI BEER AND SPIRIT STORE 1J17 3K FLAT A BV 1 DECK 6162SA WINCH ROOM 2L, VICT STORE AND MED STORE 3L, NO 5 NAVAL STORE2L13 2L LOBBY AFT A CHANGE OVER SHUT OFF FLAP2 DECK 7879SA FLAM STORE 2M, PAINT ROOM 2L 3115 21 LOBBY A BV 2 DECK 7879SA STEERING GEAR COMPT. 2M14 3K FLAT 1 BV 2 DECK 7879PA 01 DECK 6162SMB V 5 J A A M R PFORWARDM 1j19 AFT AUX MACHINERY ROOM 1J11 5JAAMR PFORWARDM BV 01 DECK 5758SM 01 DECK 6162PM BV 2H PASSAGE POS GW MAGM 1J18 1J12 2H PASSAGE OS GW MAGM BV 01 DECK 5758PM Fig 8A-2. Ventilation Board - Associated Tabular StatementBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8A-6 UK RESTRICTED Table 8A-1. NBCD Information B oards and Control Documentation Multi Section Ships Single Section Ships WE HQ1 HQ2 SB FRPP HQ1 AHQ FRPP WSB Ops Rm Incident Board 1150 1150 1150 1200 1150 1300 1200 Command State Board Weapons Sensors State Boards 600 x 600 mm Main Systems Board NBCD L Information Board 1000 x 600 mm NBCD Door Hatch Board 1200 or 1100 NBCD Ventilation Board 1200 1200 1200 1100 1100Pumping Flooding Board 1200 Length Fuel Fresh Water State Board Total Dose Record Board 750 x 500 mm Chemical State Board NBCPOs Incident Board 600 x 600 mm Kill Cards A4 FF FF FF FF FF WEClosing Down Route Cards Safety Plan RFAs only Note. The Scales shown are the minimum requirement.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8B-1 Change 1ANNEX B TO CHAPTER 8 INCIDENT BOARDS 1.Incident boards are used for the visual reco rding of information regarding damage, flood, fire or contamination. Marking is carried out by each incident board operator IBO who is constantly in communication with other IBOs to gain information. The incident board consists of deck plan drawings of all decks, arranged one above the other, on a single board which is covered in clear plastic perspex on which the operators can indicate incidents using marker pens. This is sited such that the complete picture of the ship can be seen by the NBCD Command Team. These and other NBCD informati on boards must be securely fastened to a fixed structure, preferably by bolts or stud bolts, in order to minimise the risk of dislocation whensubjected to shock loading. All incident boards are prepared in accordance with NavalEngineering Standard NES 119, of which Table 8B-1 is a summary. 2. Marker Pens Incident boards are annotated, as detailed below, using fine -tipped permanent OHP marker pens. These have a finer point then chinagraph ma rkers and they resist smudging. Markings may be removed by using a normal rubber eraser. Table 8B-1. Incident Board Symbology FEATURE SYMBOL Watertight structur es, doors, hatches, trunks, etc.Thick black line Non watertight structure Thin black line Compartment names Abbreviated in fine lettering not over 3 mm high Location markings Bold type 4 mm for deck and section 3 mm for remainder. No markings for doors hatches or trunks, eg 5Ea NBCD zone boundaries 3 mm bl ack and white broken line Fire and Repair Party Posts Segmented concentric rings filled equally with red, green and blue enclosing identification, eg aft The number of personnel stationed in each compartment at NBCDState 1.Indicated by the number cont ained in a black circle. Modularized Machinery with Halon or CO 2 drenchBlack rectangle with symbol GTM or DGM Capacities in tonnes of all watertight compartments below 1deck ships without pumping andflooding boards onlyEnclosed in a black rectangle in the compartment. Aluminium structure Bordered blue. Unbacked Melamine Continuous Emeral d green line when unbacked MPL is removed then these lines must be deleted NBCD Section boundaries 3 mm bl ue and white broken line Citadel boundaries 3 mm Continuous Orange lineBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8B-2 UK RESTRICTEDTable 8B-1. Incident Board Symbology Continued FEATURE SYMBOL Sub citadel boundaries 3 mm Broken Orange line Cleansing stations Citadel InOut airlocksNBC storeTinted Orange Gas Free - Contaminated if used spaces Purpleorange dotted line Gas free spaces not included in the citadel 3 mm continuous purple line NBCD, HQ1, HQ2, AHQ Section bases and Command shelter stationBordered in red Switchboards and EDCs Tinted green Magazines, weapon stowages, launchers, all explosive stowages and handling areas andpetrol stowages.Tinted red Main machinery spaces and associated trunkingPink or blue wash, adjacent spaces alternatively coloure d. Common trunking to be dual coloured stripes. Upper deck re-entry fire locker Red border and symbol RFL Zonal DC Boxes Black box around the letters DCBZ Weapon Section Bases Letters WSB inside a pink circle Medical Stations Red Cross in a circ le with annotation SMP, MHQ or FAP beneath Air filtration units To be identified by the letters AFU with the location and zone number. Tinted blue. 3. Recording of Inform ation on The Board The board principally concerned with the record ing of damage is the Incident Board and it is to be marked boldly by marker pens using the colours and methods shown in Figs 8B-1 and 8B-2 and as stated below a.Errors and Erasures. A significant error in board marking eg fire identified and marked in the wrong compartment should be erased and marked correctly. An incorrect words should be lined through and the correct words inserted. Errors must be logged prior to their erasure. b.Additional Information. Should be marked in black in the appropriate space between deck plans this does not include the timetable of fire, flood or contamination see sub para d below. c.Boundaries. Lines to denote fireflood boundaries are not to be used unless the deck plan compartment-marking does not identify th e boundaries sufficiently eg fire in a cabin area. Marking for contamination is to in clude boundary lines see sub-Para i. below.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8B-3 Change 3d.Marking of Times. The timetable of a fire, flood or contamination incident should be marked in red, blue or yellow marker respectively as follows 1 Initial Report. Time is to be marked in the top left-hand corner of the compartmentspace concerned or, if the space is very small, immediately outside the top left-hand corner of the boundary. 2 Containment. The time of containing the incident is to be marked in the top right- hand corner of the compartmentspace concerned or, if the space is very small,immediately outside the top righ t-hand corner of the boundary. 3 Completion. The time when action taken to deal with the incident is completed is to be marked in the bottom right-hand corner of the compartmentspace concernedor, if the space is very small, immediately outside the bottom right-hand corner of the boundary. e.Fire. Is marked by a red cross in red circle with red hatching. Times are marked in red. f.Free Flood, Slow Flood, Free Surface. Is marked by a blue FF, SF or FS respectively in a blue circle with blue ha tching. Times are marked in bl ue see Para 1471 for definitions. g.Boundary Cooling. On a deck or deckhead, a blue BC in a blue circle with qualifying wording in black. For bulkheads, a blue wavy line against the bulkhead over the lengthconcerned. h.Splinter Holes. A black Vs for hull and bulkheads black dot within a black circle for decks. These markings may be supe rimposed over other incident markings. i.Contamination 1 Vapour. Contamination from without is ma rked by yellow circle divided horizontally with CHEM or BIO in black in the top half and chemical agent designator in the lower half. The circle is to be surrounded by hatching within a yellow boundary which denotes the new citadel boundary. C ontamination from within is to be marked by brown hatching within a heavy yello w boundary and qualified by black wording to indicate the nature of the contamination eg FREON. Times to be marked in yellow. 2 Liquid. A brown circle divided as in Fig 8B-1 showing time of discovery, agent type and CAM reading, if known, with an arrow indicating the point source of the liquid. j.Shoring. A black Ts either vertically or horizontally against the deckbulkheadhull over length concerned. k.Distorted Bulkhead. Marked as a black wavy line through the length of the bulkhead concerned. l.Distorted Deck. Marked by black wording with a black arrow if necessary.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8B-4 UK RESTRICTEDm.Movement of Hands. Those movements, especially hands from the Command and their disposition, are recorded on any suitable blank space on the incident board, in black. n.Smoke Boundary 1 Doors and Bulkheads. A solid black line drawn along the line of the bulkhead containing the door and extending be yond the line of the ships side. 2 Hatches. A solid black diagonal line through the hatch extending beyond the line of the corners. o.Flooding Boundary 1 Bulkheads. A solid blue line drawn along the line of the bulkhead containing the door and extending beyond the compartment, both athwartships and fore and aft as appropriate. 2 Decks. A solid blue diagonal line throug h a hatch extending beyond the line of the corners. 3 Updating. The flooding boundary marking is to be moved as incidents are dealt with and compartments closer to the pr imary zone of dama ge become tenable. Note. Hatching Fire Flood or contamination covering adjacent compartments is to be alternated as illustrated in Fig 8B-2. 4. Electronic NBCD Information Systems Electronic NBCD information systems conform as far as practicable with the foregoing colour coding. 5. Ship Protection Incidents The Incident Board may be used by the Sh ip Protection Organisa tion in harbour. The markings to be used are detailed in BR 8988 - Royal Navy Manual of Military Training, Operations and Tactics. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8B-5 Change 1 Fig 8B-1. Incident Board MarkingsBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8B-6 UK RESTRICTED Fig 8B-2. Incident Board MarkingsUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8C-1 Change 2 ANNEX C TO CHAPTER 8 EXAMPLE OF COMMAND STATE BOARDBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8C-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8D-1 Change 2 ANNEX D TO CHAPTER 8 EXAMPLE OF COMMAND BRIEFING BOARDBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8D-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8E-1 Change 2 ANNEX E TO CHAPTER 8 EXAMPLE OF WEAPONS STATE BOARDBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8E-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8F-1 Change 2 ANNEX F TO CHAPTER 8 EXAMPLE OF SENSORS STATE BOARDBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 8F-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 9-1 Change 1CHAPTER 9 NBCD COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS CONTENTS Para R a t i o n a l i z e d I n t e r n a l C o m m u n i c a t i o n E q u i p m e n t R I C E .................... 0903 Versatile Console system VCS ........................................ 0905 Group Lines ........................................................ 0907 M a i n B r o a d c a s t ..................................................... 0908 Main Exchange Telephones ............................................ 0909 M e s s e n g e r s......................................................... 0910 Firefighters Helmet with Built-in Communications FFHBC ................. 0911 I n t r i n s i c a l l y S a f e F F H B C.............................................. 0913 S t a n d a r d S h o r t R a n g e P o r t a b l e S S R P ................................... 0914 Sound Powered Field Telephones ....................................... 0915BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 9-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 9-3 Change 1CHAPTER 9 NBCD COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 0901. The main form of communication used in the NBCD organisation is a mains-operated, battery-maintained, point-t o-point interphone system in whic h the battery ope ration takes over automatically and immediately if the main power fails. In a ddition a number of group intercom lines are provided for use between NB CD outstations, HQ1 and the Command. 0902. The communication systems used in NBCD are as follows a. The Rationalized Internal Communicati on Equipment RICE which includes the Versatile Console System VCS. b. Main broadcast system.c. Ancillary broadcast systems eg Machinery Broadcast.d. Main exchange telephones.e. Messengers whose value in communica tions must never be underestimated. f. Firefighters communication sets h elmet-mounted and hand-held radios. g47 g47 g. Standard Short Range Po rtable SSRP radios. g47 g47 h. Sound powered field telephones. 0903. Rationalized Int ernal Communication Equipment RICE The RICE is a system which embraces all direct internal speech communications, with or without call up, with the exception of the automatic telephone exchange, main broadcast, sound repr oduction equipment and loud-hailing systems. Outstation terminal equipment includes the following. a. Microphones with carbon, electromagne tic or noise-cancelling inserts as applicable these may be hand-hel d, stalk-mounted or headset mounted. b. Handsets with carbon, electromagnetic or noise-cancelling insert s as applicable. c. Headsets single ultra-lightweight double ultra-lightweight, lightweight, noise excluding or inductive loop for use on magne tic broadcast loops sp lit ultra-lightweight, lightweight or noise excluding, as applicable. d. Loudspeakers, muted or non-muted, 1, 4 or 16 W output.e. Switching elements.f. Amplifying elements.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 9-4 UK RESTRICTEDg. Plug and socket connections. h. Headset, handset and microphone stowages.i. Extensible cords.j. Miscellaneous elements, eg non-amplifying mixers, etc. 0904. At each outstation all the terminal equipment necessary to the outstation is installed. In certain instances, the facilities terminate in other equipment such as the versatile console systemVCS units. The cabling from each outstation unit or assembly is wired via junction boxes asnecessary to connection boxes sited in the Elect rical Distribution Centre s EDCs and Operations Room. In association with each connection box, a transformer, rectifie r, filter and battery is fitted for the provision of the necessary 24 V dc power supply. 0905. Versatile Console System VCS The instrument panel console is formed by the grouping of selected units to satisfy control, indication and communica tion requirements of the operator. Each unit can perform a single function or a series of a ssociated functions, is designed in a fixed range of sizes and can exist as a separate or complete unit. 0906. VCS units can be used in conjunction with interphones, telephone exchange systems, main broadcasts and intercoms. Matching units are fitted in some consoles for sound-powered telephone system, whereby the incoming ca ll from the sound-powered hand generator is converted to the power call-up of an interphone and vice versa. 0907. Group Lines Multi-way group conference communications, u tilising handsetsheadsets between key positions and personnel, are provided as follo ws and shown schema tically at Fig 9-1 a.Command Hot Line - Permits information exchange between specified officers Users Command Ops Room MEO HQ1WEO Ops RoomDMEO HQ2 in large ships b.Damage Control Hot Line - Permits information exchange on Damage Control and g47 Firefighting between specified officers. In larger ships additional, dedicated DC Hot g47 Lines are provided between FRPPs and their controlling Section Base. g47 g47 Users DCO HQ1 All Section Bases OIC large shipsAll FRPPs OIC small ships. c.DC Telling line - Enables NBCD information to be exchanged between Incident g47 Board Operators. In larger ships additional, dedicated DC Telling Lines are provided g47 between FRPPs and their controlling Section Base. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 9-5 Change 1Users HQ1 Incident Board operators. g47 All Section BaseFRPP In cident Board Operators. Ops Room Incident Board Operator.Weapon Section Base Incident Board Operators. d.L Reporting Group Green Line - Permits information exchange on electrical g47 distribution between specified positions. g47 g47 Users SCC Electrical Control Desk HQ2 Electrical Control DeskAll Switchboards EDCsWeapon Section Base CCWEAAlternative Weapon Section Base CPOWEAFRPPs e.Weapon Repair Hot Line - Provides communication to manage the Weapon Repair Organisation in the Action and Defence states. Users WEO Ops Room DWEO Weapon Section BaseOICRIC Alternative Weapon Section Base f.Weapon Repair Group - Provides communication to coordinate Weapon Repair in the Action and Defence state. Users CCWEA Weapon Section Base CPOWEA Alternative Weapon Section BaseAll Weapon Repair OutstationsWEOs Assistant Ops Room g.Cleansing Station Intercom - Permits information exchange within individual Cleansing Stations and adjoining citadel entrances. Users Cleansing Station Entrance weatherdeck Cleansing Station First StageCleansing Station Second StageCleansing Station Exit Citadel h.Command Open Line - Enables the NBCD and W eapon Repair Organisation to monitor the tactical situation as required. Users Command WEO Ops RoomCommand Team Ops RoomWSB Loudspeaker watch onlyHQ1 Loudspeaker watch onlyAlternative WSB Loudspeaker watch onlyBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 9-6 UK RESTRICTEDCIRCUITS POSITIONPERSONNELHOT LINE OPEN LINEDC TELLING LINEL REPORT GROUPWEAPON REPAIR GROUPWEAPON REPAIR HOT LINEDC HOT LINE WEO - OPS ROOM WEO ASSISTANTMEO - HQ1DCO - HQ1NBCPO ASSISTANTL DESK HQ1DMEO ALT HQ1DWEO WSBOIC ALT WSBCCWEACWEAWEAPON REPAIR PERSONNELNAVAL STORESOIC REPAIR POSTSCOMMAND SH ELTER CLEANSING STATIONMONITORING POSITIONSWEAPON REPAIR WSB 1WEAPON REPAIR WSB 2OPS ROOMCOMMAND XX X X PWO XX WEO 1X 1 X X XXX WEOS ASSISTANT 3X X X X INCIDENT BOARD X HQ1MEO 1X X DCO 3X NBCPO ASSISTANT 14 XXX INCIDENT BOARD X L DESK XX X AHQOIC 1X X INCIDENT BOARD X L BOARD XX X X WSBDWEOCCWEA 23 1X X CCWEA XXX L BOARD XX INCIDENT BOARD X WPNSENSORS BOARD 3 X ALT WSBOIC 23 1X X CPOPO WEA XX X L BOARD XX INCIDENT BOARD X WPNSENSORS BOARD 3 X WPN REPAIR PERSONNEL 3X X NAVAL STORES OFFICE XX FRPPOIC X INCIDENT BOARD X3 L BOARD X SWITCHBOARD L X COMMAND SHELTER XX X CLEANSING STATION X MONITORING POSITION X KEY X COMMUNICATION LINK 1 EXCLUSIVE PERSON TO PERSON INTERPHONE LINE SEPARATE FROM OTHER COMMUNICATIONS AND ABLE TO OPERATE WITHOUT SHIPS SUPPLIES. 2 LOUD SPEAKER ONLY3 A DEDICATED WEAPON REPAIR GROUP AND A DC HOT LINE, NOT FITTED IN OLDER SHIPS4 COMMUNICATION LINK WHEN UNDER N, B OR C THREAT Fig 9-1. NBCD Minimum Co mmunication RequirementsUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 9-7 Change 2 0908. Main Broadcast Microphones with input to the entire Main Br oadcast system are fitted at HQ1 and HQ2 with alarm pushes for both the General and Chemical Alarms. 0909. Main Exchange Telephones The exchange telephone system is robust and well-fitted with altern ative and emergency power available and may include battery power back up. It must be borne in mind that any system of internal communication is a good channel for NBCD information. 0910. Messengers Messengers should be nominated in case of complete communication failure. The messages they carry should be in a written format wherever possible. Th ey are a useful means of relaying lengthy or complicated messages wh ich might easily be mis understood or take too much time on the telephone. 0911. Firefighters Helmet with Bu ilt-in Communications FFHBC The FFHBC is described in Chapter 26 and full details are contained in BR 9215. The helmet contains a built-in radio, a bone-conduc ting microphone, a press- to-talk switch and earphones, enabling the members of a firefighting team to communicate with each-other. A hand-held radio see Fig 9-2 is provided to enab le the IC at the Forward Control Point FCP to communicate with the team. 0912. The radios have ten channels. In the standby condition, all hand-held and helmet- mounted radios are to be set to Channel 1. At NBCD State 1, each FRPP is allocated discrete channels eg odd channels forward and even channels aft these ch annels are to be specified in the ships NBCD Orders. The hand-held and helmet-mounted radios have a function switch which may be set to the FF or TL positions. The Team Leaders radio is to be set to the TLmode, allowing him to override the other radios on the same channel. The remainder of the firefighting team and the IC at the FCP are to set their radios to the FF mode. Exceptionally, theIC at the FCP may have to switch to the TL mode, eg for emergency withdrawal of the team.For Damage Repair Parties, communications may be between tw o hand-held radios. Fig 9-2. Hand-held RadioBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 9-8 UK RESTRICTEDWARNING g47 g47 THE HELMET-MOUNTED AND HAND-HELD RADIOS ARE NOT TO BE USED g47 INSIDE MAGAZINES. g47 THIS APPLIES TO BOTH THE STANDARD AND INTRINSICALLY SAFE g47 VERSIONS. g47 0913. Intrinsically Safe FFHBC The standard helmet-mounted and hand-held radios are not certified safe for use in dangerous spaces in RFAs, such as cargo tanks, cofferdams, pump rooms and areas within atankers gas envelope. Intrinsi cally safe versions of the FFH BC and hand-held radio, with an explosion-proof rating of Ex i, are supplied to RFAs. These can be identified by a blue band on the helmet, the hand-held radi o and their special batteries. g47 0914. Standard Short Range Portable SSRP These are a small transistorized portable ra dio transmitterreceives eg Cougar used for NBCD purposes and other ship activities. The case is splash- and dust-proof and contains thetransmitter and receiver circuits with their c ontrols, a speaker-microphone, a ship rechargeable battery, and built-in aerial. They are not intrinsically safe but they are acceptable for general use in HM ships those sets supplied to RFAs are intrinsically safe. Their use must be subject to thefollowing precautions a. The set must not be used where an explosion hazard exists, as in the presence of petrol vapour or in empty fuel tanks. b. Although the set is splash-proof, if it is used in an excessive water spray it should be contained in the plastic cover provided. 0915. Sound Powered Field Telephones Two field telephones with a drum of conn ecting cable are provided at each FRPP to provide communication between it and the Forward Control Position FCP. In harbour, field telephone communications and a guide line are r un out from the upper deck to the FCP along a route decided by the Senior Fire Officer of the LAFB and the OOD. A field telephone link is established between HQ1 and the FCP wh en the location of the FCP is known.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-1 OriginalCHAPTER 10 NBCD PREPARATIONS FOR WAR AND ACTION CONTENTS Para N B C D P r e p a r a t i o n s f o r W a r ........................................... 1001 F i r s t - s t a g e P r e p a r a t i o n s ............................................... 1004 Second-stage Preparations ............................................. 1005 T h i r d - s t a g e P r e p a r a t i o n s .............................................. 1006 Jettison Bill Preparation ............................................... 1007 Identity Discs ....................................................... 1009 N B C D P r e p a r a t i o n s f o r A c t i o n ......................................... 1030BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-3 OriginalCHAPTER 10 NBCD PREPARATIONS FOR WAR AND ACTION 1001. NBCD Preparations for War It is difficult to establish with certainty t hose actions which should be taken by ships on or before the outbreak of hostilities in order to improve NBCD arrangements. The difficultiesare a. To establish those actions which app ear desirable from a damage control and firefighting viewpoint and those which could, over a realistic period of time, prove tohave a degrading effect on habitability and morale. b. To establish those actions which will take time to complete and which should therefore be started at an early stage in a period of tension, and ot her actions which, once completed, might prove a distinct source of embarrassment to ships and bases, were tension to be relaxed this latter category includes actions which could involve financial loss. 1002. The Force Commander or individual Commanding Officer must be given guidance on what is desirable and what is considered acceptable under certain broad circumstances, and they must be free to decide their action accordin g to the prevailing conditions. For example a. The removal of ships side linings wa s found to be necessary during the Second World War to make easier the control of possi ble damage to the hull, but their removal in a modern ship could have a marked effect in the Arctic or tropics, as well as possibly depriving the side of lininglagging provided for the limitation of noise. b. Some preparations may be obvious to an outside observer who might interpret them as an escalation of the situation. The rule s of engagement in force at the time must therefore be taken into account. 1003. Preparations can be undertaken in three stag es. The first stage contains those actions which can be carried out covertly and later reversed at little co st. The second stage comprises actions to be taken during a hard ening of the situation. The thir d stage should be put into effect on completion of the second stage preparations if the situation continues to deteriorate and, hopefully, to be completed before the start of hostilities. In some situations eg operations other than war it may be necessary to merge or adjust the following staged preparations to ensure thatthe ships operational posture is fully tailored to the overall situ ation. This will be decided by the Command, based on guidance from the CTG a nd from internal table-top planning. 1004. First-stage Preparations a. Conduct table-top planning for likely NBCD scenarios and adjust preparations accordingly. b. Check main and duplicate key boardsdr awers are correct and make good any shortcomings.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-4 UK RESTRICTEDc. Check holdings and serviceability of NBCD equipment and stores, special attention being paid to BA, firefighting equipment and that NBC stores are adequate and in date for use. d. Review planned maintena nce on NBCD, and associated, equipment, bringing forward as necessary. e. Review NBCD contents of Ships and Departmental NBCD orders. f. Check all smoke curtains fo r operation and effectiveness. g. Check all escape hatches operate correctly.h. Check all escape ladders function correctly.i. Order the removal of facial hair.j. Review the Jettison Bill.k. Review medical arrangements 1 Order war stores.2 Check that the Ships Company are in date for medicaldental checks.3 Check that all blood groups are known.4 Accelerate the first aid training programme.5 Disperse first aid equipmen t and stores around the ship. 6 Check Chemical Field Sets are complete and in date. l. If at sea, defuel all boats except the seaboats.m. Review the arrangements for locking compartments, other than magazines and storerooms for which other arrangements already exist, to ensure ease of access in theevent of damage. n. Review arrangements for, and identify, compartments and spaces available for the stowage of additional NBCD a nd other equipment and stores. o. Ensure that the combinations to security containers are held by a suitable officer whose place of duty is remote from that of the officer normally responsible. p. Promulgate gash dispos al policy and organisation. q. Check respirators and haversack contents see BR 21702.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-5 Change 2r. Order identity discs to be worn. s. Review holdings of NBCD stores. Order additional DC shoring timber and steel plate. t. Fit anti-shatter film to all glass mirro rs and unbacked melamine paper laminate linings. 1005. Second-stage Preparations a. Ensure that victualling, NAAFI and medi cal stores are safely and adequately dispersed throughout the ship. b. Disperse the sleeping and messing arra ngements of key personnel as much as possible. c. Order respirator canisters to be changed using the spare one carried in the haversack. d. The following stores should be issued in accordance with current allowances and as necessary, and indicated by the threat assessment 1 Action coveralls.2 Once-only suits.3 NBC inner and outer gl oves, overboots and suits. 4 Additional respirator canisters.5 Chemical agent detector paper.6 DKPs 1 and 2.7 RVDs and CAMs.8 Dosimeters and radiac instruments.9 NAPS, BATS and Combopens. Order s for the issue and use of these items will normally be given by the Chief of Joint Operations CJO, the Joint Task ForceCommander JTFC or by the CTG. 10 Action carry bags, when authorised by the Command. g47 e. Order respirators and lifejackets to be carried.f. Activate SICSNAIAD, SIRS and INBDS if fitted and relevant to the threat. Run up CAMs to confirm serviceability. Equipmen t activation will need to balance the threat level against the consumption of consumables for some equipments.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-6 UK RESTRICTEDg. Prepare Secondary Me dical Position SMP. h. Land the following, non-essential, items 1 Curtains, loose covers and bunk overcas es except those covering foam rubber or plastic material. 2 All surplus furniture.3 Non-fireproofed timber excluding timber needed for DC and emergency repairs. 4 Gangway furniture eg screens, lifebelts, stands, covers etc.5 Ship nameboards, boat nameboards and badges. 6 All awnings and stanchions.7 Recreational boats.8 Loose carpets.9 Glass-fronted pictures, crests and non-essential decorative items. 10 All trophies, silver and associated cases.11 All non-Service items of personal baggage including civilian clothes and shoes. 12 Reduce holdings of paint minimum to touch up rust patches and external surfaces and other flammables. 13 Funnel badges.14 Private radiosrecording equipment which cannot be securely stowed in lockers. Mobile phones are so small that they can easily to stowed butEMCONsecurity considerations may require some acti on to be taken. i. Remove perspexglass fronts to notice boards etc and, where necessary, replace with wire mesh. j. All books except BRs etc in use, to be kept secured in lockers. Books on bookcasesshelves to have arrangem ents for restraining contents. k. Ensure, wherever possible, that items of equipment and stor es which are normally not secure, and could be accelerated unde r shockwhip conditions, are adequately secured.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-7 Change 1l. Make checks to ensure that the ship is best able to resist shock, as follows 1 Check that all shock mounts are fr ee to move and are in good condition. 2 Check that items which are shock mounted have adequate clearance around them and that stores, books etc are not stowed on top of them. 3 Check that shock mounted items are not shorted out by bights in cable or pipe connections. Minimum clearan ce are given in BR 3021, Volume 2. 4 Check that all store rooms are stowed correctly with all battens in place and items lashed in position where necessary. 5 Check that all fire extinguishers , hoses, portable pumps and associated equipments are in their co rrect stowage positions and ca nnot be displaced by shock or whip. 6 Check that all gasair bottles are in their correct stowages and are not free to move. 7 Check that all equipment secured to benches, bulkheads and other fixed structures are bolted in position. m. Distribute plastic jerrycans and similar c ontainers, filled with fresh water, around the ship. n. Accelerate and intensify the training of NBCD teams.o. Personnel to be briefed and practised on how best to protect themselves from the effects of weapons. p. Issue morphine to officersratings ic First Aid Parties. 1006. Third-stage Preparations a. Ensure that the Ships Company have access to, and are encouraged to read 1 BR 4007 - Guide to Ship Firefighting.2 BR 1329 - Survival Handbook. and that NBCD personnel have access to 3 BR 2170 Vols 1, 2 and 3 Vol 4 for submarines.4 Ships NBCD Class Book, CB 4538 series.5 Ship Stability and Survivability B ook, CB 9500 series not all ships. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-8 UK RESTRICTEDb. Issue lengths of line for securing bedding, furniture etc in place before going to NBCD State 1. c. Consider draining deep fat fryers when not in use. d. The use of hot water heating urns should be controlled and restricted to reduce wild heat and the risk of scalding. e. Issue the maximum number of torches.f. Cabins, messdecks and public areas to be secured bedding, lockers, drawers, furniture, etc when not in use. g. Servery, galley and food or other lift hatchess huttersdoors to be closed when not in use. h. Rimlocked doors to be left unlocked and cl osed. Where security is necessary hasps, staples and lightweight pa dlocks should be fitted. 1007. Jettison Bill Preparation A Jettison Bill is to be prepared in accordan ce with QRRN and included as part of the ships NBCD Orders. It should list all those items which are comparatively heavy, sited above the centre of gravity usually superstructure, 1 and 2 decks only and which can be removed and jettisoned with reasonable ease. Ideally, the Jettison bill should contain the following information a. The item of equipment.b. Its position by location marking and distance from the centreline.c. Its weight and mobility.d. The tools, if any, needed for its removal. 1008. Jettison Bill items must be peculiar to the particular ship, but the types of equipment which can usually be included are as follows a. Anchors, but not the cables which should be dropped into the lockers. b. Ships boats, which can be put into the water and secured to the ship. c. Aircraft, which can be flown off.d. Ready use ammunition lockers but not the ammunition and other weatherdeck lockers. e. Equipment such as wires and reels, hawser s, awning gear and canvas, spare gear for weapons, machinery boats, etc, cable working gear.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-9 Change 1f. RAS stump mast. g. Potatoes from their weatherdeck stowage.h. MCMVs - Mine sweeping equipment, l oops, reels, etc, compression chamber. 1009. Identity Discs All RN personnel are to be in possession of four iden tity discs on personal loan g47 a. Two stainless steel identity discs with nickel plated metal neck chains and connectors are to be secured inside the resp irator haversack. These discs are engraved with the name, official number, blood group a nd religion of the owner. They are to be worn around the neck of the owner when ordered. b. Two red, fibre identity discs. They are normally issued at the same time as the NBC g47 respirator, One is to be attached to the bo ttom of the Primary Speech Module by a brass g47 split ring. The other is to be attached to the D ring on the outside of the haversack. Both g47 are to be stamped showing the owners name to identify the respirator after cleansing. g47 1010 to 1029. Spare. 1030. NBCD Preparations for Action In applying these recommendations, or before consideration is given to making any or all of them mandatory, account must be taken of the situations in which the particular ships may be involved. 1031. In a general war situation a ship is likely to spend a large part of the time in NBCD State 2 with the majority of the Ships Company in Defence Watches. Under such circumstancesmessdecks and cabins are being lived in and work shops are being used, a nd will continue to be right up to the moment when NBCD State 1 is ordered, which may be as a result of a. A change in the overall threat which probably requires the rapid assumption of Action Stations in addition to NBCD State 1. b. Sudden and unexpected damage which c ould require the immediate assumption of Action or Emergency Stations. c. Knowledge that the operations into which the ship is about to enter will mean prolonged periods of Action Stations andor NBCD State 1 with a high possibility ofdamage.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 10-10 UK RESTRICTED1032. In the types of situation which give rise to the sudden and unexpected assumption of Action StationsEmergency StationsNBCD State 1, it is neither reasonable nor realistic to expect that all desirable precautions will have been ta ken before personnel clos e up at their stations. However, when some warning is to be expect ed, precautions can and must be taken beforehand. 1033. It is more probable that a ship will find it n ecessary to go to NBCD State 1 from State 2 with no prior warning and that occupants of compartments messes, workshops, etc will be unable to complete all the desira ble preparations before closing up. The training of the Ships Company must therefore stress the importance of tidy living at all times and the particulartraining of the NBCD teams must emphasize the need to correct any obvious faults in preparations as part of their closing up drill. 1034. If the preparations for war have been carri ed out, preparations for NBCD State 1 should normally be limited to the following, unless there is special reason for further measures a. Carry out the State 1 preparations listed in the ships NBCD Orders. b. Empty waste paper bask ets and gash buckets. c. Cover TV and VDU screens not required in Action. g47 d. If the warning time permits, all personnel dress in clean clothing. g47 e. Stow away all loose clothing and ensure that doors to kit lockers and drawers in g47 offices and cabins are securely closed. f. If towels cannot be safely stowed within kit lockers they should be firmly knotted g47 on the towel rails. g. Bundle curtains together and stow them or lash them securely in their positions. g47 h. Lash and secure movable furniture except, for example, the Wardroom table and g47 fittings where the Wardroom is th e Secondary Medical Position SMP. g47 i. Check the smaller compartments which are not covered by the normal key g47 regulations. j. Switch off unnecessary heaters, heating and electrical circuits. g47 k. No hot fatcooking oil in galleys. g47 l. All personnel carry resp irators and lifejackets. g47 m. Check that plastic, fresh water containers are full, and stowed safely. All water g47 bottles to be filled. 1035. The Command should have a clear understanding of the time taken for key personnel to close up from State 2, and the time taken to achieve full State 1. In some situations these timesmay be crucial in determining whether to order State 1 as a threat materialises or remain at State2 until after damage is sustained, in order to ensure highest feasible level of damage controlintegrity as the hit is taken.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 11-1 OriginalCHAPTER 11 SABOTAGE ATTACK AGAINST SHIPS - NBCD COUNTERMEASURES CONTENTS Para T h e T h r e a t ......................................................... 1102 M a i n B r o a d c a s t ..................................................... 1105 A w k w a r d a n d B i k i n i ................................................. 1106 U n d e r w a t e r A t t a c k ................................................... 1107 Surface Attack ...................................................... 1108 P r e - e m p t i v e A c t i o n o n D i s c o v e r y o f U n e x p l o d e d S a b o t a g e C h a r g e s ............ 1109 O t h e r A t t a c k s ....................................................... 1110BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 11-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 11-3 OriginalCHAPTER 11 SABOTAGE ATTACK AGAINST SHIPS - NBCD COUNTERMEASURES 1101. BR 8988 and JSP 440 RN Supplement provide guidance to Commanding Officers on defence against sabotage and terro rist attacks made on their sh ips both above and below water, giving background information on the factors whic h have to be considered, the preparations which must be made in advance and on dealing with the threat when it materialises. They alsoidentify a number of possible means of attack ranging from mortar attacks, to car bombs, to underwater swimmers. The potential for ships to be targeted with bi ological or chemical weapons poses a newer, albeit highly unlikely, threat in certain operational theatres. The following paragraphs provide supplementary gu idance on the damage control and NBC Defence considerations arising from a terrorist or sabotage threat. 1102. The Threat Threats to ships in harbour will normally be countered by the procedures instituted under the relevant BIKINI or AWKWARD Alert State. BR 8988 states that an attack will fall into one of two categories, alerted or unalerted. In the case of the former, the ship may be alerted to thepossibility of a threat before its arrival in port presuming there is an overriding requirement toenter harbour or at a subsequent point in its period alongside, anchored or moored. 1103. When a ship is alerted to the possibility of a threat, the ship will need to tailor its preparations to the likelihood that an attack will be made and to the leve l of warning that can be expected. This is reflected in the various levels of BIKINI and AWKWARD alert states. If aship is alerted prior to entering harbour, as many material preparati ons as possible should be completed prior to entry, although certain aspects may need to be modified in order to maintain an impression of normality on the upper deck and in areas used by visitors. When intelligence information is received after arrival that requires an increase in the general alert state, dueconsideration will need to be given to the limitations imposed by the reduced number ofpersonnel onboard. Whilst the prio rity must be to achieve a nd maintain the required state, DCFF andor NBC Defence prepar ations for the next higher st ate should be started early in order to reduce the impact of manpower shortages. It should be noted that it may not be possible to achieve the full State 1 and consideration will need to be given to deployment of the reducedmanpower. 1104. In the event of an unalerted attack, the DCFF response will vary according to the type of attack and damage sustained. In all such situations the DCFF effort will have to beundertaken without those ratings who are part of the Ship Protection Organisation SPO. Additional non-duty personnel will need to be mustered and briefed in an area clear of the upper deck and the area of damage. The OOD may need to delegate his SPO or DCFFresponsibilities to another o fficer or senior rate. 1105. Main Broadcast When calling an AWKWARD state, main br oadcast should only be used when beyond audible range of land. If alongside, or in audi ble range, either mute all upperdeck loudspeakers or advise the requirement by a less obvious pipe Clear lower deck of all officers and senior rates, muster in ... maybe a ppropriate, followed by a briefing . The Action Alarm should only be used if the ship has to react to a direct attack without warning.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 11-4 UK RESTRICTED1106. Awkward and Bikini The AWKWARD Alert System is intended to provide guidance on the defence posture required to counter possible sabot age activity during periods of tension, TTW or war. The Bikini Alert System is concerned with the measures to be taken on receipt of a warning of terroristattack. Both encompass a wide range of means of attack and thus potentia l damage. Preparations will need to be guided by available intelligence assessments. 1107. Underwater Attack If the primary threat is of underwater attack the focus of activity should be to ensure that the maximum degree of watertight integrity is maintained commensurate with the level of threat.Consideration should be given to restricting access to compartme nts on or below the waterline. A large underwater charge could result in whip action and thus full securing for action is essential. If the ship is on her own power supplies the possibility of some of them being lostshould be included in the planning as should the potential for fires caused by damaged running machinery. Should an underwater charge explode, it will be nece ssary to obtain an early estimate of the damage and commence DCFF efforts. However, the numbe r of personnel committed to the task will need to be carefully controlled in case of damage from further charges. 1108. Surface Attack If this is the primary threat, then damage sustained in the event of an attack is likely to be similar to that from a shell or missile. Fire is potentially th e greatest hazard, although splinter damage could cause localised fl ooding and casualties. The genera l guidance is to increase the watertight integrity with the al ert state and, while risk of si gnificant flooding may not be a concern, a higher NBCD state w ill permit better control of smoke boundaries in the initial stages. Again, early identification of the extent of the resulting incidents is essential but, in somecircumstances, it may be necessary to ensure, through use of the SPO, that it is safe to movepersonnel onto the upperdeck to deal with incidents there. 1109. Pre-emptive Action on Discovery of Unexploded Sabotage Charges BR 8988 contains general guidance on the acti ons to be taken when a charge is found before it activates. The principle requirements are to isolate all supplies to the vicinity andprovide a vent route for the blast. Personnel w ill need to be moved clear of the area, including those adjacent compartments which could suffer sp linter damage. Carefu l consideration should be given to the state of fuel tanks in the vicinity, noting that full tanks are safer than partiallyempty ones. The proximity of magazines to the de vice should be reviewed and the status of the flood and spray arrangements checked. The possi bility of the device triggering a magazine incident should not be discounted. It may be prudent to flood a magazine if it is estimated that there is a high risk of a serious magazine incident being initiated by the device. All portableDCFF equipment should be removed from the ar ea of the device if time permits, although this may not be prudent if it is in the vicinity of a FRPP or Section Base. Fire and repair parties should be mustered clear of the anticipated danger area but ready to respond quickly.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 11-5 Original1110. Other Attacks The possibility of attacks using BW or CW against ships is remote, although in some theatres it may rise during periods of tension. The threat can range from tear gas type aerosols discharged into ventilation systems by terroristsactivists or more serious attacks which mighteven have been directed at adjacent land forces. The appropriate level of defensive measures will need to be determined based on available intelligence assessments and guidance from higherauthorities. Th ere are limited c ounters available to terrorist a ttack as, except in exceptional circumstances, it will not be possible to achieve an effective gas-tight c itadel and some personnel will need to be exposed on the upper deck. During periods of tension or greater it may bepossible to consider maintaining a citadel at very high threat states. Prior to that somepreparatory closing down could be achieved although the benefits would need to be weighed against habitability, access, mainte nance and operational c onsiderations. In such a situation it is most likely that the threat will also apply to adjacent land forces and thus the ships posture, including dress states, should be guided by th eirs. Where no UK land forces are present, the ships posture will need to take account of local sensibilities. If possible, a more prudent course of action may be to sail, avoi dance being a primary defence against BW or CW for ships.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 11-6 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12-1 Change 3CHAPTER 12 SUPPLY DEPARTMENT CONTENTS Para S t o r e s a n d S t o r e r o o m s ................................................ 1203 Accessibility of Stores ................................................ 1204 P r o v i s i o n s.......................................................... 1205 S t o w a g e o f S t o r e r o o m s ............................................... 1206 S t o r e r o o m S e c u r i t y .................................................. 1207 Action Logistics Support Cell .......................................... 1208 A c t i o n M e s s i n g O r g a n i s a t i o n........................................... 1209 E m e r g e n c y F e e d i n g S t a t i o n E F S ....................................... 1214 F a l l o u t M e s s i n g ..................................................... 1216 ANNEXES Annex A Action Logistics Cell Command Information Sheet Annex B Incident Log Annex C Issues Log BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12-3 Change 3CHAPTER 12 SUPPLY DEPARTMENT 1201. The normal responsib ilities of the Logistics and S upply Officer LSO for provisions, naval stores, their respective storerooms a nd feeding the Ships Company must include consideration of the problems imposed by the NBCD threat which, in conjunction with the NBCD Officer and the NBC Protection Officer, also include certain aspects of the cleansing stations. 1202. The LSO organises the Supply Department to maintain the supply of food and stores before, during and after action. LSO must also take the necessary precautions to restrict the impact of secondary damage, fire and flooding in Supply related compartments. With this in mind, dispersal plans, accessibility and stowage of a ll stores ranges should be considered for all Supply spaces See Chapter 10. R outines for ventilating storeroom s must also be established with the NBCD Officer. 1203. Stores and Storerooms Special arrangements are made for the stowage of delicate, high value, flammable stores and foodstuffs liable to contamination by NBC ag ents or noxious fumes. Detailed information, in these respective areas is contained in BR 96 - Stores Accounting Instructions, BR 5 - Catering Manual and BR 1754 - Safety Regu lations for Storing and Handlin g Petroleum, Oils, Lubricants and Certain Other Hazardous Stores in HM Ships. 1204. Accessibility of Stores Stores supplied to ships for NBCD purposes are drawn from the LSO by the Marine Engineer Officer or the NBCD Officer and stowed in, or near to, FRPP lockers, the NBC store, or other authorized stowages. 1205. Provisions When operating under war conditions, ready-use stocks of provisions are to be deployed in secure places as high as practicable within the citadel, so that they are readily available as a reserve against damage to storerooms or for action messing. Any provisions or clothing not packed in impermeable containers must be sufficiently covered to protect them from gross NBCcontamination. 1206. Stowage of Storerooms All storeroom locations should always, in pea ce and war, be properly stowed and secured with appropriately fitted securing arrangements see Chapter 4. Gangways, ships side, bulkheads and approaches to storerooms should be ke pt clear of stores as far as practicable. If the space available does not permit this when the sh ip is fully stored, the stores must be stowed so that those on the perimeter of the storeroom are used first, enabling access to be gained to theboundaries after the shortest time at sea. To pres erve the contents of standard packaged stores and equipment, the special wrappings should not be removed until the ar ticles are required for use. In any event, packages incorporating wa terproof or moisture-pr oofvapour-proof barriers should not have these barriers removed.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12-4 UK RESTRICTEDThese are normally labelled either NOT TO BE OPENED UNTIL REQUIRED FOR USE or METHOD II PACK. NOT TO BE OPENED UNTIL REQUIRED FOR USE EXCEPT FOR RENEWAL OF DESICCANT. DATE OF LAST CHANGE ........... All loose wrappings and containers should be removed from storeroom s, and textiles tightly bundled, to reduce the risk of fire and of choking pump suctions see Chapter 4. 1207. Storeroom Security Storerooms have duplicate locking arrangemen ts see Chapter 4. Supply ratings are responsible for transferring the duplicate keys from HQ1 to FRPPs when NBCD State 2 or State 1 is ordered, and their return on assuming State 3 see Table 4-1. 1208. Action Logistics Support Cell When operating in the Action State, an effi cient logistics support organisation needs to be in place to ensure sustainab ility issues are correctly addressed in relation to the Command Aim. This assumes partic ular importance should the sh ip suffer secondary damage. a.Primary Functions. The Action Logistics Cell ALC should normally be in a compartment that can provide access to g ood, whole-ship communi cations ie adjacent to, or integrated with the Weapon Section Ba se WSB. The Main Stores Office is not the ideal location because of the potential for damage and low recovery time to the main broadcast and exchange telephones. A Secondary Action Logistics Cell SALC should also be identified in the event of havi ng to evacuate the ALC, within or close to the alternative WSB. The position of both Cells, and the routines to be used for retrieving stores are to be made known to the Ships Company through a regularly reviewed LSOTEM and by exercising the retr ievals process. Th e primary functions of the Primary Logistics Coordinator PLC or his Stand-by are to 1 Provide swift and accurate briefings to personnel tasked to retrieve spares. The PLC should not make the issues pers onally, as he is to be in a position to provide the wider logistics advice to the Command. 2 Evaluate the impact of battle damage incidents and be prepared to provide the Command with sustainability information. b.Personnel. With the LSO invariably employed as Damage Control Officer DCO at State 1, responsibility for providing logi stics advice and coordi nation is assumed by the Stores Senior Ra te SSR, who functions under the PLC title. In the event of the PLC being incapacitated a Sta nd-by Logistics Coordinator SLC should be nominated. The SLC should be employed in a flexible role that will allow him to be released without impacting on the primary role. ie AMT and not an IBO. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12-5 Change 3c.Store Retrievals. Efficient stores retrievals are essential and may need to be prioritised, as a number of stores requests may be recei ved simultaneously. The PLC SLC must therefore be fully aware of the Command Aim and Equipment Repair Priorities in order to determine the precedence of issues. A safe transit route should be given to the person retrieving the stores, and this is best achieved through the WSB Incident Board Operator IBOI. Retrievals should form part of NBCD circuit training. d.Documentation Required. Both the ALC and SALC must be equipped to fulfil the full logistics support function at Action. In support of this aim, an Action Logistics Information Log should be held in both cells, and contain the following 1 The Ship Plan, highlighting the fo llowing locations by colour code a Naval storerooms. b Provision storerooms. c Medical stores locations. d RAS equipment e Aircraft Spares hangar. f NBCD equipment. g NAAFI storerooms. h Ready-use stores. i Safety equipment. 2 A Command Priorities page see format at Annex A detailing a The Command Aim. b The top three ME and WE repair prioities. c The threat. 3 Incident Log pages see format at Annex B, to include a The date of the incident. b The time of the incident. c The location of the incident. d The incident. e The logistical implications. f Time reported to the CommandCommand huddle. g The final assessment. 4 A configuration breakdown of each st oreroom and sustainability implications in the event of losses. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12-6 UK RESTRICTED5 Issues Log pages see format at Annex C, to include a The date of issue. b The time of issue. c The equipment effected. d The description. e The stock number. f The location. g The name of the person collecting the item. h The time at the storeroom. i The time at the repair point. 6 A layout plan of all the Naval storerooms and contact numbers for the respective ALC and SALC. e. An up-to-date 6 monthly fall-back print no more than a month old during periods of OST or in times of real tension, should also be held at each cell, together with emergency lighting for use either within the WSB or by stores retrievers, ie torches and batteries, good communications within and external to the WSB ie Telephone, IBO or other headset and sufficient writing implements. Finally, a lap-top computer containing NAVCAT and fallback documentation is requi red at the ALC, which can be easily moved if convenient and time allows, to the SALC. f.Logistics Advice. The PLC must assess the impli cations of direct or secondary damage to the range of stores listed at s ub para 1208.d.1 above. In order to achieve this, he is to insert details of each incident on the Incident Log pages, together with any logistical impact. This information s hould be passed to the Command via the WSB, either before or during Comma nd huddles using the Flash pr ocedure if necessary. The Incident Log pages should be used thereaf ter to monitor the currency of information received and any subsequent updates. g.Conclusion. It is fundamental that continue d and effective support is available from the logistics organisation at Action. Sw ift retrieval of spar es and the ability to provide the Command with an assessment of the implications in relation to the Aim are therefore seen as important elements to sustaining the Ships fighting capability. The PLCSLC coordinates these activities and is an integral part of the State 1 team in a warship it is therefore most important to exercise the Action Logistic Support from either the Primary or Secondary Cell during in-house training. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12-7 Change 31209. Action Messing Organisation The pre-deployment of acti on snacks at State 2, and the swift distribution of hot and cold drinks to pre-ordained positions when St ate 1 is piped, is the most effective method of ensuring the short term sustenance of personnel. 1210. In a period of tension, it is highly likely th at the ship will remain closed up at Action Stations for prolonged periods, and so one of the major considerations of the Command must be to ensure that all personnel are sufficiently fed a nd hydrated to sustain th eir fighting efficiency, either by quarters or centralised messing. This can only be ach ieved by a dedicated team, who are immediately available to prep are, provide and distribute snack s, or hotcold drinks to upper deck crews and personnel between decks. As soon as the Command decides that the tactical situation allows, then a team must be in positi on to ensure that quick provision of a hot meal, either at State 1 or as the ship reverts to Defence Watches State 2. The LSO must therefore ensure that a dedicated Action Messing Team AMT is detailed on the Watch and Quarter Bills for State 1. 1211. It is entirely appropriate for the AMT to conduct Blanket Searches of their immediate areas and to be used as spare hands to assist in the damage control effort when the situation and Command priorities dictate. Nevert heless, they should not be depl oyed automatically to another role at State 1, as this will inevitably prevent them from carrying out their primary task. This applies equally to war a nd peacetime exercises, where it is e ssential that the AMT is allowed to train with the reality of operational combat. 1212. Should the Command decide that the tactical situation allo ws for the provision of a hot meal, while remaining at State 1, it is imperative that 75 of personnel remain closed up at their Action Station. This can only be achieved by st rict manpower control, and for this reason it is recommended that a card relay system be us ed. Only 25 of pers onnel receive cards, under the direction of the IC at the local FRPP or Ac tion Station. As the first wave return, the cards are handed over to those nominated to be fed next. Utilising a strong personality in the dining area to check cards and hasten personnel, the bogey time employed by FOST 75 minutes from initiation by Command to re-secure to State 1, is considered achievable in all classes of ship. 1213. Prior to operational sea traini ng and during times of tensi on, ships companies must be educated in the role of the AMT, how to effect re-supply of drinks at St ate 1 and the routine for Action messing. 1214. Emergency Feeding Station EFS Type 23 frigates benefit from a secondary feeding position that can be utilised in an emergency. It is imperative that sufficient canned provisions are held in order to feed the entire Ships Company from the EFS, complete with the appropriate quantities of messgear and crockerycutlery this should be permanently he ld in the compartment. The ME Department must also ensure the availability of the EFS equipment at all times. 1215. As the entire Ships Company of a T23 needs to be fed from the EFS in an emergency, Action messing from this compartment is a regular serial for these ships at OST. The relay cardmessing system is appropriate for the evolu tion and its successful co mpletion is achievable within the time de tailed at Para 1212.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12-8 UK RESTRICTED1216. Fallout Messing Plans are to be made for the siting of tinned food and water stocks at designated shelter positions to sustain the Ships Company for a 3 day period.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12A-1 Change 3ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 12 ACTION LOGISTICS CELL COMMAND INFORMATION SHEET ACTION LOGISTICS CELL COMMAND INFORMATION SHEET DATETIME AT STATE ONE COMMAND AIM COMMAND PRIORITIES 1 23 THREAT WARNING AIR RYW SURFACE RYW SUB SURFACE RYW MINE RYW WE REPAIR PRIORITIES 1 23 ME REPAIR PRIORITIES 1 23BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12A-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12B-1 Change 3ANNEX B TO CHAPTER 12 INCIDENT LOG INCIDENT LOG DATE TIME LOCATION INCIDENT LOGISTICS IMPLICATIONS TIME REPORTED COMMAND HUDDLE FINAL ASSESSMENTBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12B-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12C-1 Change 3ANNEX C TO CHAPTER 12 ISSUES LOGISSUES LOG DATE TIME EQUIPMENT AFFECTEDDESCRIPTION STOCK NUMBERLOCATION NAME OF PERSON COLLECTING ITEMTIME AT STOREROOMTIME AT REPAIR POINTBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 12C-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 13-1 Change 1CHAPTER 13 EMERGENCY MEDICAL ORGANISATION CONTENTS Para P r i n c i p l e s .......................................................... 1302 M e d i c a l P o s i t i o n s.................................................... 1306 F i r s t A i d P o s t s ...................................................... 1308 Secondary Medical Position ............................................ 1310 E m e r g e n c y W a r d .................................................... 1311 Facilities During Peace Time ........................................... 1312 Facilities During War ................................................. 1313 M M P P s ........................................................... 1314 F i r s t A i d T r a i n i n g ................................................... 1315 F i r s t A i d E q u i p m e n t.................................................. 1317 Peace Time Medical Organisation ....................................... 1318 M e d i c a l O r g a n i s a t i o n a t A c t i o n ......................................... 1323 C o n t r o l l e d D r u g K e y s a t A c t i o n ........................................ 1329 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 13-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 13-3 Change 1CHAPTER 13 EMERGENCY MEDICAL ORGANISATION 1301. The ships emergency medical organisation is outlined below. Further details are available in BR 1991 - Instructions for the Royal Naval Medical Service. Medical g47 countermeasures and casualty care in an NBC environment are covered in BR 21702 g47 1302. Principles A ships emergency medical organisation is designed to provide rapid and effective medical care to casualties in peace or war to en sure that personnel efficiency, and hence the ships efficiency, is maintained at the highest possible level. This i nvolves casualties receiving immediate life saving and first aid treatment and being removed from danger, treatment byspecified First Aid Party members, and treatment by the ships medical staff. Each individualin the Ships Company is potentially a member of the medical organisa tion and all RN personnel should have received some basic fi rst aid training. Immediate tr eatment of minor injuries may enable personnel to remain at their posts. The Casualty Alarm procedure is detailed in Section g47 3 of Chapter 7. g47 1303. During peacetime a Standing Sea First Aid Party SSFAP is nominated to respond to incidents. The exact response will vary and is laid down in Medical Department Standing Orders, but essentially involves ships medical staff and one First Aid Team of two closing up at the Sickbay, and a second fi rst aid team attending the inci dent or a prearranged location. 1304. At action, First Aid Teams of two are deployed from First Aid Posts to provide immediate life saving care and to stabilise injuries prior to evacuation to one of the medicalpositions. Ships medical staff adopt a roving role to provide support to First Aid Teams at First Aid Posts or throughout the ship as required. Th e medical organisation at action is coordinated from a Medical Headquarters MHQ, which is usua lly located in the Sickbay. At action much of the emphasis is placed on treating those less seriously injured personne l who may be able to return to duty, even if this is in a limited capacity. 1305. The manpower and facilities av ailable to the medical orga nisation will depend on the size and function of the ship. Most ships have a limited medical capability to treat more serious orcomplex injuries. Evacuation to more advanced care facilities ashore or afloat is needed for themore seriously injured and this will need close coordination with the ships Command. 1306. Medical Positions During routine peace-time operations the Sickbay is the focus of the ships medical organisation. Its purposes are a. To maintain the health of the Ships Company.b. To treat illness and injuries.c. To organise and promote first aid traini ng to Ships Company and first aid teams. d. To formulate and exercise the ships medical plans for emergencies and war. e. To maintain medical positions, stores and administration.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 13-4 UK RESTRICTED1307. Alternative medical positions are prepared a nd maintained during peace and war. These are First Aid Posts FAPs and a Secondary Medical Position SMP. These areas provide emergency medical equipment and adequate space for treatin g large numbers of casualties. 1308. First Aid Posts The allocation of FAPs is specified in NES 106 and varies according to the size of ship. They are to be clearly marked see Table 3-1. FAPs are sited within the Citadel the basicrequirements are a. Accessible from manned stations and quart ers without obstructing other traffic or compromising the watertight integrity of the ship. b. Adequate working space of 3000 mm x 2500 mm.c. Easy access for stretchers.d. Protection from weather, flooding , blast and shrapnel splinters. e. Close to hot and cold fresh water supplies.f. Close to sanitary facilities.g. Good ventilation and lighting, including emergency lighting. 1309. Each FAP is to be provided with the following a. First aid cabinet, bulkhead mounte d, in a readily accessible position. b. A glass fronted key box, bulkhead mounted alongside the cabinet, to retain the cabinet key. c. Stretcher and blanket cabinet.d. First aid box, bulkhead mounted, with a gla ss fronted key box built into the first aid box door. 1310. Secondary Medical Position The SMP is a designated area, normally in a Wardroom or Ratings Dining Room, where special facilities are provided remote from th e MHQ. The full specification, in NES 106, includes an operating table a nd supporting equipmentstowages. A Casualty Sorting Area is designated, adjacent to the SMP. 1311. Emergency Ward In large ships, such as CVS, an Emergency Ward is designated, usually in a large mess deck.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 13-5 Change 11312. Facilities During Peace Time During peacetime emergencies the Sickbay remains the Primary Medical Position, and any casualties will usually be brought here for treatment initially. However, if a large numberof casualties are involved, or in a major incident, alternative me dical positions may be utilised. 1313. Facilities During War At Action the Sickbay retains its peacetime roles, but with greater emphasis on training and preparation for war. At NBCD State 1 FA Ps are manned and become the primary locations for collection and treatment of casualties. The SMP is prepared and in some instances it mayalso be manned. The Sickbay is generally used as the MHQ to control and coordinate the medical effort and would be manne d by the Canteen Manager. It is not usually used for treating casualties at action. Casua lties with minor injuries may be treat ed at or near to incident scenes and returned to duty. If there are more seri ous injuries or a large number of casualties, then immediate treatment may be given at or near incident scenes, to save life or stabilise injuriesprior to evacuation, with permission from MHQ, to the most appropriate first aid post. Following the action, individual casualties may be moved to the Sickbay or SMP for further or definitive treatment. 1314. MMPPs MMPPs do not normally carry a Medical Bran ch Rating MBR or Medical Officer, and the Coxswain is responsible for the duties of Seni or Rating in Medical Charge. The ship has two FAPs but no SMP. The Wardroom is designated as the primary FAP FAP1 and is manned by the Coxswain and the First Aid Party. FAP2 is not normally manned and is used as an alternativeposition should FAP1 become untenable. All casua lty reports, including triage priority are assessed by the IC at FAP1 Coxwain and passed to ANBCDO in HQ1 for information and further action. 1315. First Aid Training In CVSLPDLPHDDFF and in MMPPFPS and Survey Ships carrying permanent Medical Branch Ratings, least 10 of the Ships Company officers, senior rates and junior rates are to be trained to the Level 2 first aid sta ndard. For MMPPFPS and Survey Ships not carrying a MBR this requirement is 25, and in the Fi rst Patrol Boat Squadron it is 100. A minimum of 5 of the Ships Company is to be include d in the medical organisation for Action and should receive Level 3 first aid training. This is ge nerally conducted on board if the MBR is a qualified first aid instructor. Level 3 task books are issu ed and must be completed within three months of joining the ship. Details are in BR 1991. In minimally manned ships, members of cleansing station parties or acti on messing teams are to supplement th e medical organisation, and must also be trained to Level 3. 1316. Notwithstanding the requirements for first aid training, ships are to encourage first aid training at every opportunity and to ensure th at medical aspects of the NBCD response are exercised. Training all Level 2 trained personnel in Level 3 skills will increase flexibility in manning, and basic training for a ll personnel particularly groups such as boats crews, divers and personnel responsible for electrical supplies or equipment will enhance the ships ability to rapidly and effectively deal with any casualties.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 13-6 UK RESTRICTED1317. First Aid Equipment First aid equipment should be widely distri buted around the ship to ensure its proximity to any incident scene, and to prevent poten tial for loss of a significant amount of medical equipment in a single incident. First aid boxes and stretchers are located throughout the ship for emergency use. FAPs and the SMP contain locked cabinets with first aid and emergency medicalequipment. All First Aid Party members are i ssued with first aid ba gs. Scales of medical equipment are promulgated in the annexes to the Medical Equipment Table for RN Service Afloat NSN 6545-99-898-0006. 1318. Peace Time Medical Organisation Ships alongside in harbour are to have a Le vel 2 first aid qualified member in their Duty Watch. Consideration should be given to dec onflicting this individuals first aid duties from other emergency duties. 1319. All ships have a Standing Sea First Aid Part y SSFAP. This party should be included within the ships emergency organisation and s hould consist of a Medical Branch Rating MBR, where borne, and four other Leve l 2 trained first aiders. If a MBR is not borne, a suitably qualified IC should be nominated. They should be day workers and are to be correctly dressed and equipped at all times. They should muster whenever the emergency party are required. 1320. The SSFAP are to be under the direct contro l of the IC at the Forward Control Point FCP. They are to muster for all emergencies in the following manner a. MBR 2 first aiders to the Sickbay 2 first aiders report to IC FCP. b. It is recommended that the MHQ C oordinator closes up at the Sickbay. 1321. On other occasions that the SSFAP are required to muster, such as for man overboard, the point of muster will be designated by the Officer of the Watch. Ships Medical StandingOrders should include details of the SSFAP response to specific incidents. 1322. In MMPPs the SSFAP is made up of the Coxswain and members of the First Aid Party day work SS Department. 1323. Medical Organisation at Action In war, the ships wartime complement may include additional medical staff. Normally each First Aid Post is manned by a team of five - an IC and two teams of two qualified firstaiders. This allows medical teams to be de ployed in support of in cidents and to maintain adequate medical care to casualties already in medical positions. First Aid Parties should be deployed in teams of two. MHQ is manned by a suitably qualified Coordinator, or team depending on the size of the ship. All Medical Department and First Aid personnel are to wear g47 white surcoats with a red cr oss in NBCD States 1 and 2. g47 1324. Initially the senior member of the medical staff will close up at MHQ and other medical staff will disperse to the FAPs. Medical staff at action will adopt a roving role in support of their medical teams. The exact areas of responsibility w ill vary according to different ships but, in general, qualified medical sta ff should cover specified areas of the ship and should not congregate in one area unless there are extenuating circumstances.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 13-7 Change 11325. Close liaison is necessary between ICs of FAPs and the Medical Coordinator in MHQ, and between MHQ and the DCO in HQ1SSC see Chapter 8. Maintenance of an accurate casualty state and knowledge of the location of a ll medical assets are e ssential information for the Command. Liaison between MHQ and HQ1 is also necessary to coordinate casualty evacuation and relocation of medical positions should this be necessary. 1326. Watch and Station Bills of minimally manned ships may not be able to identify an adequate number of pe rsonnel to man medical positions as recommended. In this case, FAPs should all be manned but none s hould fall below a minimum manning level of an IC plus one first aid team of two. They are to be suppl emented as the situation dictates. Personnel from Cleansing Station Crew or Action Messing Teams ma y be used if this does not detract from their primary role. This minimal manning risks a slow medical response to in cidents, or a decrease in the care afforded to casualties already in the FAP. Medical coordination and control becomesmore important, with a greater need to identify the most appropriate team to respond to anincident. 1327. All members of the Ships Company have a responsibility to assist casualties to the best of their ability. However, this must not distract them from the ships damage control orfirefighting effort, or from fighting the ship. 1328. Medical Branch personnel, when in a roving role at Action, are to carry ELSA, but First Aid Parties do not need to carry it. 1329. Controlled Drug Keys at Action g47 Whilst strict adherence to civilian drug laws must be maintained in peacetime, at Action g47 Stations quick access to Controlled Drugs CD strong analgesia must be available to Medical g47 Branch staff, particularly where no Medical Officer is available. When ships are required to go g47 to Action Stations, Medical Branch Ratings are to obtain the CD Keys from the Commanding g47 Officer, to allow them access to the CD cabinet in the Sickbay and main medical store. During g47 training OST, MTT procedures are to be exer cised but there is no requirement for the CD keys g47 to be handed over. The issue of morphine auto-injectors at Action must have Command g47 approval. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 13-8 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-1 Change 3CHAPTER 14 FIRE AND DAMAGE CONTENTS SECTION 1 - FIRE Para F i r e H a z a r d s ........................................................ 1401 A d d i t i o n a l H a z a r d s i n W a r ............................................ 1402 A d d i t i o n a l H a z a r d s i n U p k e e p P e r i o d s ................................... 1403 D I Y I m p r o v e m e n t s................................................... 1404 E x p l o s i v e s a n d F u e l .................................................. 1405 F l a s h P o i n t a n d I g n i t i o n T e m p e r a t u r e .................................... 1406 T o x i c i t y o f S m o k e ................................................... 1409 SECTION 2 - DAMAGE C a u s e s o f D a m a g e ................................................... 1450 Damage from Conventiona l Weapons Above Water ......................... 1452 I n t e r n a l E x p l o s i o n s .................................................. 1453 B l a s t R o u t e s ........................................................ 1454 U n d e r w a t e r C o n t a c t E x p l o s i o n ......................................... 1455 U n d e r w a t e r N o n - c o n t a c t E x p l o s i o n...................................... 1456 Collision and Grounding .............................................. 1457 Nuclear Explosions - Above Surface ..................................... 1461 N u c l e a r E x p l o s i o n s - U n d e r w a t e r ....................................... 1462 Z o n e s o f D a m a g e .................................................... 1464 S h o c k ............................................................. 1465 D e s t r u c t i o n......................................................... 1467 R e d u c t i o n o f S p l i n t e r H a z a r d s.......................................... 1468 Flooding ........................................................... 1469 Rate of Flooding .................................................... 1470 Flooding Definitions ................................................. 1471 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-3 Change 1CHAPTER 14 FIRE AND DAMAGE SECTION 1 - FIRE 1401. Fire Hazards Fire is an ever-present risk in ships, with the risk being greater in war and upkeep periods. As always, prevention is better than cure and, excepting those caused by enemy action, most fires on board ship can be prevented by clean and tidy living, keeping things in their properplaces, being fire conscious and obeying the releva nt regulations. Listed below are some of the more common causes and aids to propagation of fire a. Carelessness with naked lights lighted pi pes and cigarettes left about, and cigarettes thrown over the side. Clothing hung to dry on a hot surface or lying about when it g47 should be stowed. Bunks left unmade, mattr esses stacked in messd ecks, and mattresses with their fireproof covers removed. b. Rags left lying about, especi ally if oily canvas, etc, st owed away wet all materials of vegetable origin, if wet or oily, can generate enough heat to start a fire spontaneously. c. The careless stowage of bundles of rags in the vicinity of hot exhausts and exhaust ducting such as funnel uptakes. d. Papers and books left about in offices, cabins and messdecks, or tucked away near sleeping billets. e. Paint and oil splashes in contact with heat paint pots not returned to store at secure too many coats of paint on surfaces indi scriminate use and stowage of aerosols. f. Cooking fat, especially in deep-fat fryer s, allowed to overhea t, left unattended, or contaminated with water. g. Timber stowed near sources of h eat or soaked with flammable liquid. h. Bilges, flats, workshops, etc, allowed to remain oily, untidy and dirty.i. Misuse of electrical apparatus or use of defective apparatus. j. Non observance of the requirement that all private electrical appliances must be checked safe in accordance with BR 200052. k. Sparks from dirty incinerator uptakes.l. The use of plastic containers as dustbins, waste-paper baskets or gash bins. Only metal bins should be used.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-4 UK RESTRICTEDm. Servery, galley, food or ot her lift hatchesdoors shutters left open when not in use. Tally plates reading WHEN NOT IN USE, THIS HATCH IS TO BE CLOSED should be fitted. n. Non-observance of the regulations for ha ndling flammable liquids, and for stowing and handling explosives BR 1754 and BR 862. 1402. Additional Hazards in War Heat from an explosion, including the h eat flash from a nuclear weapon, and unspent missile propellant can start prima ry fires. Secondary fires, as an indirect consequence of damage, may be caused by a. Hot splinters striking combustible materials.b. Flammable liquid fuels brought into contact with hot surfaces eg on the surface of rising flood water. c. Combustible material thrown by blas t or shock against a source of heat. d. Damage to electrical circuits, causing sparks or overheating and ignition of insulation. 1403. Additional Hazards in Upkeep Periods Fire precautions and firefighting in Upkeep Periods are covered in Chapter 24. The main hazards are a. Welding and burning operations, the safe ty regulations concerning open flame heating are contained in BR 200020. b. Numerous temporary elect ricalair leads passing through doors and hatches. c. Difficulty in maintaining control of sm oking and the use of electrical equipment. d. The arisings of waste material which would normally not be allowed to accumulate.e. The use of flammable substances such as adhesives and paints. f. Civilian personnel who are not familiar with the ship layout. g. Possible disruption of normal firefi ghting equipment and communications. 1404. DIY Improvements Despite general improvements in habitability in ships, there remains a desire to overcome minor deficiencies and provide personal touches, by DIY. However, DIY presents many potential fire dangers and it is essential that DIY installations are closely controlled. FLAGO provides guidance on the exercising of this control. 1405. Explosives and Fuel It must always be borne in mind that fire in the vicinity of stowed explosives or fuel including weapon fuelpropellant is an immediate and grave risk to the safety of the ship.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-5 Change 1 1406. Flash Point and Ignition Temperature Warships contain considerable quantities of flammable liquids, so it is important to understand the significance of the terms flash point and ignition temperature. 1407. Heat raises the temperature of a combustible substance to the point where fuel in the substance gives off vapour. When enough vapour is formed to support a flame the substance is at its flash point. If the vapour is heated further, it ignites when combined with enough oxygen and the substance is then at ignition temperatur e. Flash points and ignition temperatures vary with different substances. Fuels such as DIES O and AVCAT are known as high flash point fuels because their flash point is above normal ambient temperature. However, low flash point fuels such as gasoline petrol have a flash point below normal ambient temperature, so must behandled with greater care to avoid sources of ignition. 1408. DIESO and AVCAT in the form of an atomized spray eg a rupture d, pressurised system may ignite below their respective flash points when in contact with a flame. Fig 14-1. Fire Caused by an Anti-Ship Missile 1409. Toxicity of Smoke g47 The smoke produced by ship fires and burning weapon propellant see Fig 14-1 is highly g47 toxic. If inhaled, it will quickly become fatal. Smoke management procedures are detailed at g47 Annex K to Chapter 21. g47 g47 1410-1449. Spare g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-6 UK RESTRICTED SECTION 2 - DAMAGE 1450. Causes of Damage Like fire, material damage can occur in a ship in peace as in war, though in war the chances are, of course, greater. A collision or a grounding may cause the underwater hull to be ruptured with the consequent flooding of co mpartments and damage to equipment in the immediate vicinity Primary Zone damage with possible additional damage remote from theincident Secondary and Remote Zones of damage. In peace, explosions can normally be discounted, but if they do occur, they are genera lly internal. In war, explosions may occur outside and inside the ship. The extent of damage from an explosion cannot be for ecast since it will depend on such variables as weight and nature of the explosive, the position of theexplosion relative to the ship, the type and si ze of ship, her subdivision and hull strength. General information regarding th e effects of weapon attack on surface ships is provided in CB g47 8844 - Wea pon Effect. Damage posters Form S.30751 -6 show examples of damage g47 sustained by ships in Operation Corporate in 1982. Reports on ship damage are in BR 8362 and CB 83622. Whenever damage is sustained in action, collisions or from any other cause, reports must be rendered in accordance with QRRN. The required forms of report are covered in Chapter 37. Fig 14-2. Above Waterline Damage Caused by an Anti-Ship MissileUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-7 Original 1451. Explosive weapons are classed as conventi onal or nuclear. Th e term conventional normally refers to bombs, shells, missiles, rockets, mines or torpedoes that are filled with anytype of chemical explosive which does not re ly on nuclear reaction to produce its explosive power. 1452. Damage from Conventi onal Weapons Above Water Weight for weight, weapons designed to ex plode on impact carry a larger charge than those designed to pierce struct ural protection. The explosion of a weapon above the waterline can cause extremely heavy local damage, with wi despread secondary damage by splinters, shock and whip with probable loss of wa tertight and gastight integrity. Subsidiary effects of damage can be serious and some examples are a. Blast entering funnels and uptakes can cause damage to machinery. b. Riddling, ie multiple holes in the freeboard from near-miss splinters, will cause loss of reserve buoyancy. c. Fires may be started in the vicinity of the explosion and remote from it. d. Heavy casualties may result from splinters and objects, including personnel being thrown violently by shock and blast. Fig 14-3. Aircraft Cannon Fire DamageBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-8 UK RESTRICTED Fig 14-4. Weapon Entry Hole, Showing Petalling of Plating 1453. Internal Explosions The explosion of a weapon inside a ship will cause very heavy local damage with complete destruction of structure and services. The venting of explosion gases will create aformidable secondary zone of damage. In addition to the immediat e primary and secondary effects, there will most probably be fire, loss of watertight and gastight integrity, failure of pipesystems, electrical and other services in other areas of the ship. Should the weapon explode below the waterline and rupture the outer hull pl ating, flooding can spread back through the compartments and spaces wrecked by its passage a nd detonation. The results of any accidental internal explosion will be similar, in type if not in degree, except that there will be no entry path.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-9 Original Fig 14-5. Damage to Fully Clipped D oor Caused by Internal Explosion 1454. Blast Routes a.Magazines. Arrangements are made in magazines to allow for any build up of pressure, due to a rapid burn- off of a weapon, to be vented off to atmosphere. In the event of a detonation this arrangement is inadequate, and will not prevent extensivedamage. b.During Action. Deliberately opening up blast ve nting routes prior to and during Action is not practicable, or a dvised, for the following reasons 1 The position of explosions cannot be predicted before the weapon enters the ship. 2 Opening doors and hatches in the stru cture is detrimental to the watertight integrity of the ship and could facilitate the passage and spread of flash, fires,smoke, NBC contamination and possibly floods.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-10 UK RESTRICTEDc.Post Action. When the presence of unexplode d enemy munitions is confirmed in a ship post-action, opening up a blast venting route may be benefici al. While this will have little effect on the degree of damage at the point of an explosion, it may ameliorate the effects as blast spreads through adjacent compartments. In the case of a slowerburn-off the opening of a blast route would be beneficial. The blas t venting route should be arranged to take the most direct path to the weather deck. However, it should beborne in mind that the passage of the blast may cause damage to structure, systems andfittings as it passes along the venting rout e. Due account should be taken of any compartments adjacent to the venting route which might present a hazard by reactingadversely to the blast. Personnel are to be kept clear of the blast venting route until the munition has been dealt with. d.Improvised Explosive Devices IEDs. IEDs should be treated as unexploded ordnance. The ship should be brought to the highest state of water tight integrity and a blast venting route opened up as described in S ub Para c above. 1455. Underwater Contact Explosion An underwater explosion is effectively tamped by the water and when it happens against the hull of a ship it causes very severe local damage a charge of just one or two kilogramsagainst the hull is generally enough to penetrat e the plating. Outside the radius of severe damage there is normally little e ffect other than flooding and po ssible splinter damage. Shock is usually only of minor importan ce and fire is seldom caused di rectly by underwater explosion. A contact mine or torpedo exploding against the hull will destroy a large part of the hullstructure, the internal structure, fittings a nd equipment. Fig 14-6 shows Second World War torpedo damage. The resulting fl ooded area may be extensive. Most of the structure in way of the hole will be seriously weakened and could resu lt in the ship breaking in two. Flooding could result in a serious loss of stability and produce heel loll or list andor trim.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-11 Original Fig 14-6. Underwater Damage - Contact Torpedo 1456. Underwater Non-contact Explosion The pressure pulses from this type of explos ion cause damage to an extent depending on the size of charge, its distance from the hull and, to some extent, the depth of water Fig 14-7 shows Second World War non-contact mine damage. If the explosion is outside the hull- splitting distance, dimpling or buckling of the plating between frames and distortion of theframes is probable. Successive pressure pulses striking the sh ip may lead to longitudinal bending, known as whip Fig 14-8, with th e possibility of breaking the ships back.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-12 UK RESTRICTED Fig 14-7. Non-contact Mine Damage Fig 14-8. Whip DamageUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-13 Original 1457. Collision and Grounding Ships are constantly at risk of damage fro m navigational incident s, but prompt damage control measures will normally save a ship in these circumstances. Fig 14-9 shows typicalgrounding damage. Fig 14-9. Grounding Damage 1458-1460. Spare.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-14 UK RESTRICTED1461. Nuclear Explosions - Above Surface Nuclear Weapon yield is explained in Volu me 2 of BR 2170. Table 14-1 gives a rough approximation of the ranges at which damage of different degrees of severity will be likely fora 20 kT and 10 MT airburst, assuming that the wea pons are exploded at the height that gives the greatest blast effect for the weapon yield. The ta ble also gives approxima te distances at which exposed combustibles are likely to ignite. Table 14-1 is only a generaliza tion because blast effect depends on such variables as heig ht of burst, direction of the ships head relative to burst, atmospheric conditions which modi fy the effects of heat and the nature of materials. As used in the table, severe damage means that the ship could be sunk, or put out of action with damage enough to require major recons truction moderate damage means the ship will be immobilized and need much repair, especially to shock sensitive machinery and electronic equipment lightdamage means that although the ship may be s till capable of operating, there will be damage, especially to electronic and ot her equipment, even though it ma y be repairable with ships resources. Table 14-1. Approximate Range of Effects - Nuclear Airburst Damage SustainedRange km 20 kT 10 MT Severe 0.8 3.2 Moderate 1.2 6.4Light 2.0 11.2Damage to aerials and parked aircraft 3.2 12.8-16.0 Exposed combustibles ignited 2.4 24.0 The significant part of the inte nse heat pulse lasts for about one-and-a-half seconds from a 20 kT weapon and 30 seconds from a 10 MT weapon. As weapon yield increases, the distance at which the heat is effective increases more than the ranges of other effects. The arrival of the heat pulse is virtually instantaneous so that some of the fires caused by it may be extinguished by thefollowing blast. However, this will be off-set by the indirect or seconda ry fires that are almost certain to follow. A low airburst or surface burst will cause similar da mage, but the ranges of effects will be less. 1462. Nuclear Explosions - Underwater The shock wave from this type of explosion lasts much longer than from a conventional non-contact weapon long enough, in fact, for the pr essure to be exerted all round the hull at once crushing or squeezing effect. This will cause widespread damage to the whole of theunderwater hull, the amount and severity of wh ich will vary with the yield of the weapon, distance of explosion from the shi p, depth of burst, depth of water, strength of structure and the attitude of the ship to the explosion. Water wa ves developed after an underwater explosion may cause damage to structure, flooding through w eatherdeck openings and loss of external fittings and equipment. Wave formations will vary with the yield and depth of explosion, the depth of water and the topography of the sea-bed. 1463. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-15 Original1464. Zones of Damage Damage to a ship can be divided into three zones a.Primary Zone. This is in the immediate vicinity of the cause of damage explosion, collision, grounding and, particularly in the case of explosion, will be the zone of complete destruction. That part of the Primary Zone below the waterline will probably be completely floode d and nothing can be done except to try to contain the flood water within its original bounds. b.Secondary Zone. The area surrounding the Primary Zone will most probably suffer from split and leaking structure, doors and hatc hes, fractured pipes, damaged electrical circuits and fittings, fires, smoke and possibly toxic fumes. It is unlikely that this zonewill flood immediately, but slow and progr essive flooding is probable because of damage to hull and bulkheadsdeck s surrounding the Primary Zone. c.Remote Zone. Explosion, collision or gr ounding, particularly explosion, w ill cause a shock wave to travel through the ships structure and may cause a violent whip, with resultant damage and possibly fire. Whip can cause extensive rippling and distortion of structure, damage to equipment, fittings and services, and often slow flooding over a large area. 1465. Shock The large accelerations and decelerations imparted to equipment directly or indirectly connected to the hull may result in shock damage Fig 14-10. Most of the important machinery and equipment in warships is either designed to be shockproof or is fitted with shock-resistantmountings. Even so, the shock forces may overcom e these features and cause failure in an item of equipment because of fracture usually in th e securing arrangements. Damage from shock may be caused by a.Relative Movement between Separate Components. This may lead to collision between components, failure of mechanisms, ope ning or closing of contacts. Extensive power failures may result from the accidental opening of switchgear. Damage toelectronic equipment and disp lacement of fuses, telephone handsets and similar fittings may also occur. b.Relative Movement between Different Parts of the Same Item. Excessive strain caused by large bending moments may result in distortion of fittings which are made ofductile materials or fracture in those which are brittle. This is the most frequent causeof damage to machinery. c.Passage of Stress Wave. An intense stress wave, with its associated strain, passing through the material may cause failure in its path.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-16 UK RESTRICTED Fig 14-10. Shock Damage to Machinery 1466. All portable and semi-portable equipment, fittings, ladders, stores etc must be properly secured or stowed as a precaution against shock or whip effects. Warships incorporate the following design features to redu ce the effects of shock or whip a. The use of non-brittle materials.b. The support of overhanging masses.c. Special securing arrangements to ab sorb accelerating and decelerating forces. 1467. Destruction Structure, services and equipment may be completely destroyed by the force of an explosion and may be severely damaged by collision or grounding. In addition, the area of explosion damage may be greatly extended by fragmentation and the projectile effect of debris.Splinters may cause fragments of plating and equipment to act in turn as splinters. The effectsof flying debris vary greatly, depending on whether the explosion occurs, how near it is to vital equipment and power supplies and the thickness of interposed st ructure. The penetration of decks and bulkheads always destroys watertight andor gastight integrity. The limitation ofdamage from blast and splinters, and from a bows-on collision is in the first place a matter ofdesign eg collision bulkhead. Vulnerable equipment is protected as far as possible by structureand other equipment and, in large ships, side and deck protective plating. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-17 Change 3Whenever possible, alternative power supplie s are provided for important machinery and services, and arrangements are made to enable systems to be isolated from damaged areas.According to size and type of ship, main machinery and associated systems are designed as faras practicable to operate as separate units. Pr ovision is made for emerge ncy power to be supplied if alternative supplies fail. 1468. Reduction of Splinter Hazards The fitting of anti-shatter film to all glass mirrors and the removal of unbacked melamine laminates will reduce the splinter hazard to pe rsonnel. Covers for TV and VDU screens should be available to be fitted at State 1. 1469. Flooding Flooding causes loss of buoyancy and the failu re of non-watertight equipment in the flooded spaces. It impairs ship stability and may cause heel andor trim. In a small ship the heel will probably be loll which may lead to capsize, and excessive trim may cause a small ship toplunge. Excessive heel which may be list or loll in a large ship gives serious risk of capsize. In all ships, a large heel impairs the operation of weapons and other e quipment and has a serious effect on flying operations. Immediate measures are necessary to restore a ship to a stable andupright condition see Chapters 15, 16, 30 and 31. Countermeasures such as leakstopping, pumping and shoring must be promptly a pplied and the main flooding boundary quickly established. Extension of flooding to large spaces high in the ship has a most adverse effect on stability, and the forming of free surface in any compartment will give a loss of initial stability. As heel and trim increase, it is likely that further holes in the freeboard are brought below waterthe effects are cumulative and hence the need fo r prompt action. Shock or whip damage may cause flooding in spaces removed from the actual incident Remote Zone and a careful search must be made after damage, with particular attention given to compartments low in the ship. 1470. Rate of Flooding The speed with which a compartment will fl ood can be appreciated from the fact that, for example, a hole 150mm in diameter and 1.8m below the waterline will admit about 30m 3 of water in five minutes. In other words, this small hole would lead to the complete filling of acompartment 6m x 3.7m x 2.4m in less than 10 minutes. 1471. Flooding Definitions g47 The categories of flooding in ships are defined as follows g47 g47 a.Slow Flood. Ingress of waterliquid into a compartment from either an internal or g47 external source, which can be controlled by fixed or portable pumping equipment or by g47 the same on completion of firs t or second stage leakstopping. g47 g47 b.Free Flood. Ingress of waterliquid into a compartment from either an internal or g47 external source, which cannot be controlled by fixed or portable pumping equipment and g47 where first aid leakstopping actions have faile d or have not been attempted due to the g47 rate of ingress. A free flooded compartme nt will not necessarily become completely g47 filled with waterliquid this is dependent on several factors including the source of the g47 flood and the position of the compartment with respect to the waterline. g47 g47 c.Free Surface. A description of free surface a nd its effects are at Paras 3033-3035. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 14-18 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-1 Change 1CHAPTER 15 DAMAGE CONTROL PRACTICE CONTENTS Para I m m e d i a t e A c t i o n i n H Q 1 ............................................. 1501 I m m e d i a t e A c t i o n a t t h e F R P P.......................................... 1502 H a z a r d s ........................................................... 1504 P o w e r F a i l u r e ....................................................... 1505 F o l l o w - u p A c t i o n.................................................... 1506 Z o n e s o f D a m a g e .................................................... 1508 I n d i c a t o r T e s t P l u g s .................................................. 1509 Flooding Boundary ................................................... 1510 Leakstopping and Shoring ............................................. 1513 P i p e S y s t e m s ....................................................... 1514 C o f f e r d a m s......................................................... 1515 W r e c k a g e .......................................................... 1517 D a m a g e R e p a i r E q u i p m e n t ............................................ 1518 T h e R a m s e t E x p l o s i v e - P o w e r e d T o o l .................................... 1519 Thermal Lance Cutting Equipment ...................................... 1527 Cutting and Spreading Equipment ....................................... 1532 g47 Displacement of Floodwater ........................................... 1534 g47 Counterflooding to Reduce List ......................................... 1540 Responsibility for Counterflooding ...................................... 1543 T a c t i c a l C o n s i d e r a t i o n s ............................................... 1544 Salvage of Ships with Hazardous Cargoes ................................ 1551 g47 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-3 Change 2CHAPTER 15 DAMAGE CONTROL PRACTICE 1501. Immediate Action in HQ1 If flooding from damage results in heel of mo re than a few degrees, the most urgent task confronting the Action NBCDO and the DCO see Chapter 8 is to restore the ship to a stableand, if possible, upright condition. If the upri ght condition is impossible, the aim must be to obtain a heel which is acceptable to the operation of weapons, incl uding aircraft. It should be borne in mind that heel caused by floodwater is pr obably loll in a small ship and list in a big ship see Chapter 30. 1502. Immediate Action at the FRPP In conjunction with the urgent requireme nts of reporting and passing information, countermeasures must be started. Generally, personnel nearest to an incident, or discovering it, should start tackling the job them selves. Their priorities are a. Raise the alarm.b. Initiate a continuous and a ggressive attack on a fire. c. Ascertain and limit the extent of damage and flooding. d. Carry out first aid repairs. 1503. Speed is vital in the early stages of combatting damage. Although search and investigation of compartments and spaces must be done thoroughly, it must also be done quickly. Much damage will be readily apparent and the immediate plugging of a visible leak may wellprevent a compartment from flooding when the leak would be no longer visible. Firefighting, leakstopping, clearing away debr is, etc, are immediate actions. 1504. Hazards Damage, particularly fire, is likely to be accompanied by smoke, perhaps dense, or by toxic or combustible gases. If the officer or senior rating in charge considers that a dangerous atmosphere exists, breathing apparatus must be worn by those personnel dealing with the incident. Structural damage is likely to be th e cause of further personal danger - sharp broken edges at head height, holes in decks, ladders mi ssing, etc. Such dangers should be roped off and illuminated as soon as possible, but until this can be done, a sentry with a torch should bestationed to warn of the danger. 1505. Power Failure Damage to electrical supplies will probably result in failure of lighting circuits. The restoration of lighting may be delayed because of more urgent work to be undertaken by the Electrical Repair Party, but it should be given r easonable priority for its marked effect on morale as well as progress of work. If power to esse ntial equipment and mach inery is lost and cannot be restored through a lternative supplies, the supply of em ergency power to equipment must be prioritised by the DCOL, in consultation with the Action NBCDO and DCO, reflecting theCommand Aim.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-4 UK RESTRICTED1506. Follow-up Action Following the initial countermeasures, the ur gent requirement is the establishment of fireflooding boundaries, leakstoppi ng, pumping, shoring weakened structure and the restoration of services. 1507. The repair and control of damage in action is largely a matter of improvising to meet circumstances that cannot be foreseen exactly or in detail. The sole purpose of a warship is to be a fighting unit and her capability to fulfil this role must not be reduced unless such a reductionis essential to enable her to be kept afloat and moving. Apart from this, all the resources of theship must be made available to deal with damage. If it prove s necessary to use items eg mess tables and cushions for purposes for which they were not intended, aut hority should be given without hesitation. Firefighting excepted, the most urgent need is to combat flooding, ie stop the leaks and pump out flood water. Speed is of the utmost importance because a. Extension of flooding must be stopped as soon as possible to preserve buoyancy and stability, and to prevent the loss of equipment and services essential to the shipsseagoing and fighting efficiency. b. As compartments fill, the plugging of holes becomes progressively more difficult.c. The ship may heel andor trim and bring above-water holes below the new waterline. 1508. Zones of Damage An early appreciation of the zones of dama ge see Chapter 14 is essential before coordinated action can be take n. To this end, blanket sear ch parties must be sent out immediately. 1509. Indicator Test Plugs When a search is being made great care must be exercised not to spread flooding by the incautious opening of watertight doors and hatches. To enable tests for flooding to be made without opening comp artments, indicator test plugs ITP are fitted to the crown of every watertight compartment except those normally c ontaining liquid in bulk within the Red Risk Zone see Chapter 5. ITPs are generally fitte d to the hatch or manhole giving access to a compartment, but they may be fitte d to any suitable and accessible part of the structure. The plug is a hollow bolt with a small hole at the side leading to the central bore. The bolt should be cautiously unscrewed until the hole at the side of the thread is exposed. If water spurts out thecompartment is obviously full-flooded and the plug should be screwed home. If air is heard to g47 hiss out, the compartment may be flooding and great care should be taken if it is decided to open g47 the hatch hissing air could simply be caused by imbalance of ventilation systems. If nothing g47 is seen or heard the hatch may be cautiously lif ted and the compartment examined. Test plugs to magazines and flammable storerooms have an elongated thread and are fitted with a nut andsplit pin to prevent complete withdrawal of the plug. Fig 15-1 illustrates a plug in the ventingcondition and also shows in section a plug fitted with a nut and split pin.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-5 Change 1 Fig 15-1. Indicator Test Plug 1510. Flooding Boundary When a ship is damaged below water, the need for rapidly establishing the flooding boundary cannot be too highly stressed. Initia lly, the limits of the flooding boundary are the limits of the intact structure surrounding the area of the damage, ie inside the Secondary Zone and probably towards its outer edges. The immediate aims of the Repair Parties must be thereduction and eventual eliminati on of the slow flooding in the Secondary Zone. The ultimate objective is to reduce the flooding boundary until it coincides as nearly as possible with the Primary Zone. Unless the measures taken are pr ompt and effective, th e Secondary Zone may become completely flooded. In deciding whic h bulkheads and decks are to form the flooding boundary it is necessary to a. Ascertain which compartments are flooding or flooded as a direct result of damage. b. Inspect adjacent compartments to locate pr ogressive flooding, its cause and to make certain what structure is sound. c. Decide in which compartments the flooding can be stopped or controlled. 1511. When the initial flooding boundary has been d ecided, energetic acti on must be taken to establish it and ensure its integrity by a. Stopping leaks in the structure and isol ating pipe systems un til temporary repairs are carried out.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-6 UK RESTRICTEDb. Concurrently with leakstopping, rigging and working portable pumps and eductors g47 operating fixed pumpingdrainingsalvage systems if fitted. c. Shoring leaking doors and hatches.d. Shutting ventilation systems and drainage systems as necessary. e. Supporting strainedweakenedbulging bulkheads and decks with shores. 1512. When the initial flooding boundary has been esta blished, the next most urgent task is to reduce the area flooded as much as possible. St opping leaks to bring the ingress of water to within the capacity of available pumps will allow the eventual reclamation of the compartment. 1513. Leakstopping and Shoring Details of leakstopping, in itial repair and shoring ar e contained in Chapter 16. 1514. Pipe Systems Generally, the restoration of pi pe systems is an after-action job to be tackled in slow time. Damage to the HP Sea Water Main, however, must be dealt with more urgently, even ifonly by temporary measures and th ese are described in Chapter 16. 1515. Cofferdams Cofferdams are structures of wood andor steel built to form temporary watertight barriers. They are generally constructed of tong ued and grooved planking between 38mm and 75mm thick, secured to a framework of shoring timbers, but they can be made of steel platessuitably stiffened and welded. The usefulness of a cofferdam is mainly restricted to the waterlinearea and some uses are as follows a. To restrict the spread of water from large holes in the ships side at or above the waterline, until repairs are made. b. As dwarf bulkheads to break up free surface area.c. To restrict the flood water that mig ht come up through a damaged deck. d. To allow access to a partially flooded comp artment by blanking off the lower part of the door opening. 1516. In most circumstances, a cofferdam needs to extend only about 500mm above the damaged waterline but, in some cases, it might need to extend almost to the deckhead, leavingonly enough space for access, suction hoses, etc. A cofferdam acting as a trunk between two hatches must obviously be made watertight thr oughout its length, and st rength of construction must be carefully watched to prevent breakdown under pressure.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-7 Change 11517. Wreckage When a ship sustains damage to the hull or internal structure it usually means a lot of distorted, torn and loose plating, beams, frames, et c, and before any form of watertight repair can be attempted, eg the fitting of a cofferdam, this torn and loose structure must be cut away orbrought reasonably together. To cut the structure away quickly will require the use of a thermallance cutting equipment as there will invariably be too much spring in the metal to allow theuse of cold chisels or hacksaws. If the ed ges of broken plating can be brought reasonably together it may be possible to weld or strap them. Weakened structure can be strengthened withdoubling plates or stiffening angles secured by welding or the use of a Ramset explosive-powered tool. Flapping plating in the hull is extremely dangerous and every effort must be made to cut it away or lash it securely. Damaged cables, lo ckers and fittings can be cut away for access, by g47 the cutting and spreading equipment. g47 1518. Damage Repair Equipment Some equipment in ships is carried specifica lly for damage control purposes, eg shoring material and thermal lance and must not be us ed for any other purpose. It must be borne in mind, however, that all the equipment and tools carried for normal daily maintenance can and should be used for the control and repair of ac tion damage. Such equipment includes the ships welding and burning sets, liftin g equipment and the tools cont ained in the various technical workshops. 1519. The Ramset Explosive-Powered Tool The Ramset tool is an explosive-powered fastening tool which is intended primarily for use in ships of comparatively light scantlings, a nd for the repair of dama ge structure above the waterline, eg a breached citadel. It can be used in emergency, by order, for structural patchingunder shallow flooding provided that special pr ecautions are taken. Use of the Ramset tool enables a patch plate and inserted rubber sheet to be nailed to the parent plate. The Ramset g47 tool has a 9.5mm bore, is 375mm in length and weig hs 3.6kg. It is simple to operate and can be used by anyone after comprehensive training. However, it is dangerous if abused or mishandled and all safety precautions must be strictly adhered to. Ramset training facilities are available at Phoenix NBCD School see BR 21705. 1520. The fastening system consists of a steel drive pin nail which is 40mm long with a 5.5mm shank and a 9.5mm diameter head, and a fastening charge. The fastening charge is colourcoded to denote its power as follows Brown Sub-charge for use on extra thin plating or aluminium. g47 Green Light strengthYellow Medium strengthRed Heavy strength The weakest charge must always be used for the fi rst firing, if necessary into a test plate, and increased to the strength necessary to drive the nail flush-headed into the patch plate. A redplastic tip is fitted to all nails to guide them in the barrel when fired. A nail must never be usedwithout this red plastic tip in place. The outfit of charges supplied to a ship is peculiar to that ship and is decided solely by the thic kness and type of plating in the ship.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-8 UK RESTRICTED Fig 15-2. Ramset Tool and Operator 1521. A patch plate of up to 9mm thickness can be secured to a parent plate up to 15mm thick, provided that the total thickness of plating and rubber insert does not exceed 25mm. For the strongest possible fastening, the nail should comp letely penetrate the parent plate and its head should be flush with the surface of the patch pl ate as the Ramset nail itself is the fastening medium. The elastic properties of the penetrated steel provide a vice-like grip of the shank of the nail and the holding power varies only with the thickness of steel penetrated. 1522. The procedure for operation of the Ramset tool and the safety arrangements and precautions are as follows a.Safety of Personnel. Despite built-in safety features, it is possible for plastic shrapnel to be produced during Ramset operation. The following personnel safety equipment is therefore to be worn by the Ramset tool operator and all other personnel involved with, or in the vicinity of the work being undertaken 1 Overalls correctly fastened.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-9 Original2 Ear defenders. 3 Polycarbonate lens goggles.4 DMS boots.5 Full anti-flash. b. Where possible personnel other than the tool operator, should be kept 5 metres from the immediate vicinity and remain out of the line of fire from possible spallingforeignobjects which may result from th e operation of the equipment. c.When Handling the T ool Make Sure That 1 The tool is not loaded until required for firing.2 The tool is not carried in the loaded condition.3 The shield is fitted.4 The tool is not pointed at the opera tor or other people, whether loaded or unloaded, and is kept pointed down. 5 Casual onlookers are not allowed to gather as they would be a hazard to the operator and to themselves. d.To Load the Tool 1 Grasp the handle with either hand. Do not place the finger on the trigger at any time except when intending to fire. Grasp the lower assembly with the otherhand and rotate the handle one -eighth of a turn counter-c lockwise. Draw the handle directly to the rear and swing it around until it rests against the lower assembly. 2 If reloading after firing, eject the spent charge case with the positioning rod provided. 3 With the breech clear, examine the barrel, chamber and breech face to ensure that no obstruction or a bnormal condition exists. 4 Insert the red-tipped drive pin nail point-first into the barrel. 5 Insert the charge weakest strength for the first firing into the chamber of the barrel. Press it firmly home with finger pressure only. Do not depend on the closing breech to seat the charge. Never attempt to lock the tool unless the rim ofthe charge is completely pressed into the chamber.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-10 UK RESTRICTED6 With the charge fully seated, swing the handle and upper assembly into line with the lower and slide it forward as far as possible. Rotate the handle one-eighthof a turn clockwise to lock. 7 The tool is now ready to fire. e. Before Firing 1 Make sure that no flammable vapours or materials are present or are likely to be present. 2 Whenever possible, make sure that the other side of the pa rent plate is clear of obstruction and personnel. 3 Wear the goggles that are supplied in the Ramset kit. f.Firing 1 Grasp the handle of the Ramset tool with one hand and the lower assembly with the other. Keep the finger clear of the trigger. 2 Locate the barrel muzzle, by the location marks on the shield, with the desired fastening point. 3 Depress the tool tight and square against the work until the yellow firing tip indicator shows flush with the top surface of the handle. 4 Press the trigger. Notes 1. If the tool fails to fire do not remove it from the work surface for at least 10 seconds, then carefully withdraw it and keep the muzzle pointing in a safe direction. Unlock and open the tool, and remove the charge. 2. Make no attempt to fire the tool at an angle to the work surface although the built-in safety measures should prevent if firi ng. Always hold the tool perpendicular to the work surface. g.Safety Arrangements. The following safety arrangements are built into the Ramset tool 1 A visual yellow check button that shows flush with the handle when it is cocked. 2 It cannot be fired at an angle to the work, it must be square. 3 It fails safe when the shield is removed.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-11 Original4 It will not fire if the barrel is inadvertently unscrewed. 5 The breech automatically locks when it is cocked.6 It cannot be fired against a soft surface, eg clothing. 7 It can only be fired in the correct sequence, ie cocking first, then pulling the trigger. 8 It cannot be cocked if the breech is not properly locked.9 The cocking action and safety pawl lie perpendicular to each other so that it will not fire if dropped. 10 It automatically unlocks with the release of cocking pressure. 11 Firing gases are diverted on to the face of the blow-back shield, completely eliminating bounce. 12 The handle grip is neoprene and does not become slippery when wet. 1523. One of the main uses of the Ramset tool is the repair of a breached citadel, which necessitates gastightness in the finished work. Th e patch plate should have an overlap of at least 100mm more than the greatest dimension of the hol e and before fitting it the parent plate should be faired as much as possible. The rubber insert must be the softest rubber available. The nails should be spaced approximately 75mm apart and are started at the middle of the edges and worked towards the corners. The patch plate can be dressed with a hammer if necessary as work proceeds. To ensure gastightness, the comple ted repair should be sealed around the edges with masking tape or a sealing compound su ch as putty, cable gland compound, etc. 1524. The Ramset tool supplied for use in the Serv ice has some important differences to the standard tool, which allow its use under shallow flooding. Thes e differences are as follows a. A special safety shield is fitted ma nufacturers part No 24203 instead of the standard part No 24168. b. A special threat protector cap is fitte d manufacturers part No 24202 instead of standard part No 24198. c. A special washer is located behind the firing pin manufactur ers part No 24205. 1525. It is important to clean a tool which has been used underwater, immediately after use, to prevent corrosion. The cleaning routine is as follows a. Make sure the tool is not loaded.b. Thoroughly rinse the tool in fresh water.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-12 UK RESTRICTED c. Immerse the complete tool in a 2 per cent solution of water soluble oil. To ensure the solution penetrates all parts of the to ol, open and close the breech then, pressing against a firm surface, work the tool up and down. d. As soon as possible completely strip the t ool, wash the parts in light oil, wipe the excess away to leave a thin film, and reassemble. 1526. The explosive charges, which are packed 250 in a Box M64, are to be stowed in the small arms ammunition magazine. The Marine Engineer Officer is to be responsible for the custody of the remainder of the equipment which, it is recommended, should be accommodated in the Engineers Ready Use Store, in a secure stowage. 1527. Thermal Lance Cu tting Equipment This damage control emergency cutting equipment is portable and allows the operator to cut ferrous, non-ferrous metals and most other material rapidl y, with accuracy and control. It uses ultrathermic cutting rods which are precision mini thermic lances ie iron wires encasedin a tube through which oxygen is fed. The r ods are ignited by a battery ignition system arcing between the rod and the hand-held striker. One rod will cut approximately 380mm of 20mm steel dependant on the operator and can be used in water up to 1 metre deep. this will permitits use in personnel rescue a nd battle damage situations. Full details are contained in BRF 6589402, Damage Control Thermal Lance Cutting Equipment. Fig 15-3. Thermal Lance and OperatorUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-13 Change 11528. The thermal lance equipment cons ists of six major components a. Aluminium storage case.b. Body harness.c. Oxygen cylinder and regulator.d. Batteries and cable assemblies.e. Cutting torch and striker plate.f. Ultrathermic rods. 1529. Safety precautions are as follows a. The correct dress when using the thermal lance is 1 Overalls worn over No 4s and cotton underwear.2 DMS boots.3 Anti flash hood.4 Welders goggles.5 Welders gloves. b. Be aware of the composition of the target material.c. Be aware of what is behind the target material.d. Clear the area of flammable materials.e. Keep bystanders a minimum of three metres away.f. Never point the torch at anybody.g. Do not allow the positive and negative sides of the battery to contact.h. Untrained personnel are not to use the therma l lance. Training is carried out on the NBCD 35 Course or by special arrangemen t with Phoenix NBCD School as detailed in g47 BR 21705. 1530. Before using the thermal lance, the following preparations are to be made a. Inspect all components for damage or wear. Check the batteries and oxygen cylinder are fully charged batteries are to be charged as a pair in series and should be kept fully charged at all times.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-14 UK RESTRICTEDb. Connect the cutting torch to the oxygen cylinder and set the regulator to 90-120 psi depending on application. c. Connect the batteries to the harness, cutting torch and striker cutter torch in the right hand. d. Check the working area, remember painted and plated surfaces can give off lethal fumes to adequate ventilation must be provided. e. Wear the correct safety clothing, including anti flash, welders gogglesfacemask and gauntlets. 1531. When commencing cutting work a. Open the oxygen cylinder valve.b. With gauntlets on, undo the collet nut on the cutting torch and insert an ultrathermic rod it will bottom out of the seating washer tighten the collet nut. c. Point the rod away from the operator and br ing it into contact with the cup of the striker plate when the rod top starts spark ling introduce a light flow of oxygen into the cup by gently squeezing the oxygen control le ver a circular or sc raping motion may help to effect ignition. When the rod has ignite d keep the oxygen flowing and move the top to the work area. Put the striker aside where it will not hinder the work. d. The rod should be angled slightly to the direction of the cut and dragged along the cut line. The speed of movement should be sl ow enough to ensure the material is cut all the way through and the oxygen jet blows th e molten material clear. Another technique is to use the torch like a saw. For comp rehensive information on cutting methods refer to the makers handbook. WARNING 1. THE TEMPERATURE AT THE ROD TIP IS 5000 DEGREES CENTIG RADE. THIS MAKES IT A VERY DANGEROUS PIECE OF EQUIPMENT. EXERCISEGREAT CAUTION AND ALLOW NOBODY WITHIN 3 METRES OF THEOPERATION. 2. THE MIXTURE OF OXYGEN AND ELECTRICITY IS POTENTIALLY LETHAL, UNTRAINED PERSONNEL MUST NOT USE THE THERMAL LANCE.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-15 Change 31532. Cutting and Spreading Equipment The hydraulic cutting and spreading equipment see Fig 15-4 is provided for clearance of wreckage after Action damage. It is powe red by an air-driven hydraulic pump, air being supplied from EDBA bottles, or from the ships LP or HP air systems. If compressed air is notavailable, the tool may be powered by a hand- operated hydraulic pump. The tool is capable of cutting steel bar of up to 16 mm diameter and steel plate typically used for the construction ofship bulkheads, doors, etc. When used for spr eading, the working arms exert a force of between 35 kN 3.6 tons and 86 kN 8.7 tons, depending on the opening of the arms. The kit comprises an aluminium box containing the following components a. Combined cutting and spreading tool and associated hydraulic hoses.b. Hydraulic hand pump.c. Air driven hydraulic pump.max imum air inlet pressure 8 bar d. 2-stage air pressure reducer.e. Hydraulic pressure relief dust cap. for releasing excess pressure in hoses if they have been stowed in a hot location, causi ng hydraulic locking of the self-sealing couplings f. Adaptors and hoses for connecting the hydraulic pump to bottled air or ships air supply. Fig 15-4. Cutting and Spreading EquipmentBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-16 UK RESTRICTED1533. The equipment is only to be used by trai ned operators, wearing overalls, safety helmet with visor or goggles, and heavy duty gloves. Training is included in all Aircraft Handler g47 Qualifying Courses and the NB CD 35 Course, and a dditional training ma y be arranged with g47 Phoenix NBCD School Booking Office. Detaile d operation and maintena nce instructions are provided in a handbook in each kit. Operation of the tool is by a dead mans handle which is turned one way for cutting and the other way for spreading. When this handle is released, thetool stops operating. When used for cutting, it is essential that the tool is held at 90 to thematerial being sheared, to prevent the blades bein g forced apart and damaged. For spreading, the tips of the tool are inserted between the areas to be spread. If the gap is too small, spread thearms and insert one tip, close the arms and bend the fixed material away to provide a wider gap. 1534 Displacement of Floodwater The loss of buoyancy due to a free-flooded co mpartment can be considerable. If the ships outer bottom is holed and the damage d area cannot be reached by repair parties, consideration should be given to displacing the floodwater by a. Inflatable fenders or airc raft salvage bags, if the compartment is still accessible. b. LP air via an improvised connection e g indicator test plug on the compartment boundary, or by ships divers via the holes in the hull. 1535-1539. Spare. 1540. Counterflooding to Reduce List Counterflooding to correct adve rse list can be undertaken only in ships which have a fair degree of longitudinal subdivision. This will not be found in small ships but ballast tanks incorporated into the structure can be used for a similar effect. The results obtained from fillingor emptying such tanks are listed in the NBCD Class Book. 1541. Counterflooding is generally used only to gi ve an immediate correction to dangerous list or list that nullifies the ships armament. For damage flood water to cause list it must be off- centre, which is only really possible in ships w ith longitudinal subdivision. Special arrangements for counterflooding are fitted in airc raft carriers. The ballast syst em in assault ships can be used for counterflooding if necessary. 1542. Should the total correction available by count erflooding be insufficient to bring the ship back to an acceptable level, it may become nece ssary to flood selected watertight compartments at the expense of the equipmen t they contain. This can usually be done only by hose from the HP Sea Water Main and usually entails closin g down a section of the HP Sea Water Main or accepting a loss of pressure in the section concer ned. Any form of deliberate flooding results in a loss of reserve buoyancy and though it produces qui ck and effective corrections to heel and trim it must be regarded as an interim measure only. As soon as it becomes possible to undertake the lengthier process of transferring liquid fu el and fresh water the deliberately flooded compartments must be pumped out and the transf erence and pumping out must be done together to avoid undue changes in the stability condition of the ship. Due regard must be given to the relative leverages of the comp artments involved. Counterflooding and the transfer of liquid weight must be restricted to that necessary to restore the operational efficiency of the ship.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-17 Change 11543. Responsibility fo r Counterflooding Captains Standing Orders should allow for sufficient counterflooding to be carried out immediately to cover the most urgent requirements. The Marine Engineer Officer MEO iswholly responsible up to these limits. Should he consider more counterfl ooding to be necessary, permission must be requested from the Command who would make the decision in the light of the tactical situation, remainin g freeboard, weather conditions, etc. It is important that immediately a compartment has been flooded up to its crown, the valves are shut to prevent extension of flooding, straining of the deckh ead or free communication of flood water. The Action NBCDO must keep the stability condition of the ship under constant review. The DCO should give any necessary orders for transference of fuel and the working of fuel tanks to ensure an uninterrupted supply to the main engines. He must also issue any orders necessary for the isolation of the HP Sea Water Main and the operation of all pumps associated with damage control. 1544. Tactical Considerations If the ship stops listing before the angle of deck-edge immersion is reached and is not rolling heavily, the danger of capsize is not immediate and counterfl ooding should be stopped. The decision to counterflood further should then be governed by the tactical situation, ie whether the use of armament or the operati on of aircraft is required, or by the necessity of urgent repair work. If none of these requirements exists, the h eel should be corrected by the transfer of liquid weights. Great care must be taken to differentiate between list and loll. Generally, if a ship withlongitudinal subdivision is heeling, the condition is list. A ship with little or no longitudinal subdivision transversely constructed can rarely attain a condition of list if the heel is caused by flood water, and loll must be assumed see Chapter 30. 1545-1550. Spare g47 g47g47g47 1551. Salvage of Ships with Hazardous Cargoes g47 When rendering DCFF assistance to merc hant ships, the dangers from hazardous g47 cargoes must be considered. Guidance is provide d in Chapter 5 of BR 21702 to expedite the g47 identification of such hazards. g47 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 15-18 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANK g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-1 Change 1CHAPTER 16 LEAKSTOPPING AND SHORING CONTENTS SECTION 1 - LEAKSTOPPING Para G e n e r a l C o n s i d e r a t i o n s ............................................... 1601 U n d e r w a t e r D a m a g e ................................................. 1603 W a t e r l i n e D a m a g e ................................................... 1604 Leakstopping Devices and Methods ..................................... 1605 Softwood Wedges and Plugs ........................................... 1606 L a r g e H o l e s ........................................................ 1608 S p l i n t e r B o x e s ...................................................... 1609 P a t c h P a c k s ........................................................ 1610 Improvised Leakstoppers .............................................. 1611 Steel Stopper Plates .................................................. 1613 G R P E m e r g e n c y R e p a i r P a c k .......................................... 1614 g47 C e m e n t B o x e s ...................................................... 1615 D a m a g e d P i p e s...................................................... 1616 SECTION 2 - SHORING S h o r i n g............................................................ 1622 S y m p t o m s o f S t r a i n .................................................. 1623 Supporting Weakened Structure ........................................ 1624 T i m b e r S h o r i n g ..................................................... 1625 A d j u s t a b l e S t e e l S h o r e s ............................................... 1626 T o o l s f o r S h o r i n g .................................................... 1631 G u n t e r B a t t e n s ...................................................... 1632 P r i n c i p l e s o f S h o r i n g ................................................. 1633 G e n e r a l R u l e s f o r S h o r i n g ............................................. 1634 Methods of Shoring .................................................. 1635 B a s i c I n s t r u c t i o n s f o r S h o r i n g .......................................... 1636 Multiple Shoring of Bulkheads ......................................... 1639 F a b r i c a t e d S h o r e .................................................... 1643 S h o r i n g T r a i n i n g A l l o w a n c e ........................................... 1644 Machinery Spaces ................................................... 1645 T h e E m m s D a m a g e R e p a i r C l a m p....................................... 1646BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-3 OriginalCHAPTER 16 LEAKSTOPPING AND SHORING SECTION 1 - LEAKSTOPPING 1601. General Considerations The work falls naturally into two stages a. First aid leakstopping, to stop the inflow of water or reduce it to a rate which portable or fixed pumps can contain. b. Post damage, semi-permanent repairs, to make the ship sufficiently seaworthy to continue operations or to pr oceed to a repair facility. 1602. Very large holes or serious damage to the hu ll cannot generally be re paired at either of these stages. Such damage is in the Primary Z one and is dealt with by establishing a flooding boundary. Less extensive damage, such as smalle r holes and splits in the hull, bulkheads and decks, damage to pipe systems and strained or damaged doors and hatches can and must be dealt with. There are several ways to deal with these different kinds of damage usually the simplestis not only the quickest but the best. In deciding the most suitable type of repair the following must be considered a. The rate of flooding and the size of the compartment.b. The kind of hole eg puncture or split, its size and whether the plating around it is distorted. c. The accessibility of the damage and its position relative to the waterline. d. The manpower, equipment and pumping capacity available. e. The importance of the compartment, as determined by the Command Aim. 1603. Underwater Damage Holes which are completely underwater obviously cons titute the greatest danger and must be tackled immediately to slow the rate of flooding to within the scope of pump capacities. A small compartment will fill more rapidly than a large one with similar damage andleakstopping devices must be applied swiftly to all leaks, starting at the bottom of thecompartment, to prevent its total loss due to fr ee flooding. A large compartment will fill slower than a smaller one with the sa me damage, allowing more time for leakstopping. This, however, should not distract from the urgency of the situ ation. Some damage w ill be so severe and flooding so rapid that leakstoppi ng cannot be carried out and pum ps will not reduce the level of water. In these cases the compartment must be shut and allowed to free flood, and the boundary structure made watertight. This may require the use of shoring to support weakened or straining structure or fittings.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-4 UK RESTRICTED1604. Waterline Damage Holes at or just above the wa terline should be dealt with as quickly as conditions permit, since they are a great potential danger. The rolling, heeling or trim of the ship, or increase offlooding elsewhere, may bring them underwater, thus increasing the flooding at the waterline. This will cause free-surface flooding, which w ill impair stability and may hazard the ship. 1605. Leakstopping Devices and Methods The main difficulty in leakstopping is making a watertight joint between the stopper and the edges of the damaged plate. Around an entry hole the inboard surface is usually very ragged and petalled but an exit hole ma y present a fair inboard surface. The principle in both cases is to choke the flow of water by compressing soft ma terial into the hole and against the edges of the plating. Mattresse s and bedding material are especially suitable for fairly large holes. Other materials can, of course , be used and some methods of leakstopping are described in the following paragraphs. 1606. Softwood Wedges and Plugs Small splinter or bullet holes, and small splits can normally be plugged by hammering in softwood wedges or bungs for round holes. Th ese have the advantage of swelling when wet, making them grip and seal more firmly. Wedges can be used singly or in bunches, and small gaps can be filled by pieces of wedge which can be split easily from a whole wedge along the straight grain. Wedges have a tendency to spri ng back when used on thin plating or in oily conditions. A recommended remedy is to cover the wedge with wet cloth before driving it in. The cloth fills the gaps between the wedges as well as providing a better grip. 1607. When using wedges in a vertical split, multiple splits or splinter holes, the lowest ones must be tackled first work proceeding upwards. This w ill ease the problem of obscuring low splits by the wedges already driven in and will, in general, make the task of wedging up easierand more complete. Where splits and holes are obscured by water they can be felt for with thefingers and the wedges guided in accordingly. Wedging up is the only method of leakstopping against seawater pressure which can be carried out single-hande d. All other methods will require two or more people. 1608. Large Holes If holes or splits are too large to be fille d by softwood wedges, alternative methods of leakstopping are available a. Splinter box.b. Patchpack.c. Improvised leakstopper.d. Steel stopper plate.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-5 Change 31609. Splinter Boxes These are used for patching holes with ragged edges. They are shallow GRP boxes which are available in three sizes, 300mm diameter 175mm deep, 450 mm diameter 200mm deep and 600mm diameter 225mm deep. One face is open and has a rubber seal around its edge, the opposite face being closed and with a 15 mm hole in its centre which is blanked off with a bolt, butterfly nut and washers. When used on a tiled deck, tiles and deck cement should be g47 removed to allow a better seal. The box can be held in place by a shore see Fig 16-1, when the g47 hole is sealed by the foot of the shore or by the wooden wedge. Alternatively it can be secured by removing the bolt, etc. and using a 50 50 6mm steel angle strongback fitted with aneyebolt and a 600 12mm ringbolt and butterfly nut with a wooden washer. Allowances are scaled to one set of splinter boxes, one of each size, per FRPP and one per Main Machinery Space. If needed, and the necessary equipment is available, a heavier strongback can be madeby bolting or welding an eye approximately 12mm into the throat of a short length of channelbar. In order to maintain a low magnetic signature, GRP structured vessels are to locallymanufacture eyebolts and strongbacks from aluminium, as detailed in BR 21703. g47 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 Fig 16-1. Splinter Box and Shore g47 g47 1610. Patch Packs These consist of six 316in thick mild steel plates ranging in size from 12in 9in to 36in 24in with a number of eyes welded to one side of each plate. All six plates, complete withstrongbacks, hookbolts and wingnuts, are tack-wel ded together to form one pack for ease of stowage. The plates are intended to be applied to the outside of the damaged shell plating with the 2in ein flat bar strongbacks inboard, held in place by the in dia. hookbolts and wingnuts, with sheet rubber or other joining material in serted between the patc h and the shell plating. Allowances are scaled to one patch pack per FRPP. The 76mm 38mm steel channel, provided at FRPP lockers can be used if the strongbacks need to be more robust.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-6 UK RESTRICTED 1611. Improvised Leakstoppers The shape and extent of holes in the hull may preclude the use of splinter boxes or patchpacks, but adequate leakst oppers can be improvised using ma terials readily to hand. Table tops or similar flat boards may be considered as emergency stopper plates . Sealing between the stopper and the hull can be achieved using bedding, a shot mat or soft furnishings. If entry holes are severely petalled, a sausage of rolled material e g blankets or carpet should be wrapped around the jagged plating until the pad stands well cl ear of the edges. This type of leakstopper will normally be held in place by shoring, but an improvised strongback ma y be appropriate. For holes well above the waterline, wh ere less urgency is needed, it is advisable to cut off the worst of the hull petalling to make the seal more effective. Fig 16-2. Leakstopping - Large Hole - Using Shore Fig 16-3. Leakstopping - Large Hole - Using StrongbackUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-7 Change 3 1612. In addition to the allowance of patchpack s, strongbacks and hookbolts in BR 21703, additional devices may be fabricated onboard, as shown in Fig 16-3 and 16-4. g47 Fig 16-4. Strongback and U, T and L Bolts 1613. Steel Stopper Plates Large ships carry an allowance of steel plate for damage repair and in smaller ships engineers workshops will, generally, have read y-use plate available. Handling of large steel plates is difficult, so they should be cut to the required size before moving, and their use will only be practicable when the ship is no longer under attack. The plate may be secured to the hull after insertion of packing, where required by welding or by use of the Ramset tool. 1614. GRP Emergency Repair Pack Ships with glass reinforced plastic GRP hulls carry an Emergency Repair Pack for making repairs to minor hull da mage. The pack includes all materials, personal protective equipment and instructions. Th e two-part epoxide based repair material produces best results on clean, dry and well prepared surfaces, but in an emergency it will tolerate slight oilcontamination and ma y be applied underwater. The pack can also be used for making temporary repairs to ruptured pipes, etc. The effectivene ss of the repair can be enhanced by clamping it to the damaged surface until the epoxy resin cures. The minimum temperature for curing is 5C, but the gel time will reduce considerably at higher temperatures.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-8 UK RESTRICTED 1615. Cement Boxes Small holes near boundaries, and in difficult corn ers, can be dealt with by using a small cement box. The material used as the leak stopper is rapid hardening cement Ciment Fondu, sometimes called damage control cement, which is a semi-permanent repair material. Unlikeordinary commercial Portland cement, which takes some time to harden, the rapid hardeningcement sets in five hours, hardens in eight hours and achieves maximu m strength in 24 hours. g47 It will also set, providing it is well contained, under st atic water. The leak must be stopped as much as possible using softwood wedges or some other form of leakstopping and the surrounding plating, which is to be covered by cement, must be cleaned of oil, grease, loose paint, etc. GP detergent is recommended for this purpose, care being taken with its application.The cleaned steel can then be roughened with a cold chisel or similar tool to aid the grip of thecement. A cofferdam or cement box should be bu ilt around the leak using, for preference, tongued and grooved timber or heavy plywood board ing. The cement can be mixed with either salt or fresh water to provide a stiff mix. It is sometimes useful especially if water from the leakis still coming in, or present, to fill sand bags, one third full, with mixed cement before mouldingto suit the damaged area. This will reduce wash ing-away of the cement. The cement placed in the box must always be well tamped down, care be ing taken to avoid trapping air. If small amounts of running water are present it is reco mmended that sheet rubber or PVC be placed over the leak and taken to the bottom of the box. This will give the cement a better chance of settingand also greatly reduce the chances of any of it being washed away. A drain pipe should be set into the box at a low level in order that any water which may become trapped inside may bleedoff. When the cement has set this pipe can th en be plugged. It should be remembered that 0.1m 3 of mixed cement weighs approximately 40.5kg and that sufficient should be made to fill the box. Fig 16-6 shows the construction of a cement box. Fig 16-5. Cement BoxWARNING CONTACT WITH THE CEMENT POWDER OR WET MIX CAN CAUSE IRRITATION, DERMATITIS OR BURNS. EYE AND SKIN PROTECTION IS TO BE WORN.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-9 Change 31616. Damaged Pipes Softwood plugs, wrapped with cloth, can be hammered into a severe d pipe if the open end is in reasonable shape. Plugs are not to be used in pressurised systems and must be secured into position, to reduce the hazard to personnel in the event of a blow-out. If the pipe is distorted, the use of blank flanges is more effective, but takes longer due to the need to isolate the systemand remove bolts. 1617. Splits and small splinter holes in pipes can be repaired by isolating the system and applying the suitable size of pi pe repair clamp or by a rubber patch secured by cord whipping. g47 Small bore pipes can be repaired by use of rubber hose and Jubilee clips. Fig 16-6. Pipe Repair Clamp Fig 16-7. Rubber Pad and WhippingBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-10 UK RESTRICTED1618. Pipe repair tape kits are carried onboa rd, under the control of the Hull Section Engineers Workshop in RFAs. Each kit include s two-part epoxy putty, repair tape, protective gloves and instructions. The resin in the repair tape is activated by contact with water and cures in approximately 30 minutes, depending on the temperature. 1619. Damaged HP air or hydraulic systems can be repaired, in emerge ncy situations, using hose repair kits. The allowance of these kits , specified in BR 21703, varies between ships. Each kit contains stainless steel braided, PT FE lined hoses in 5 metre lengths and various Keelaring reducing couplings. These repairs can be applied to systems operating at pressures up to 276 bar, but should only be considered as temporary, pending permanent repairs. 1620-1621. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-11 Change 3SECTION 2 - SHORING 1622. Shoring Many of the leakstopping devices described above depend on shoring for their efficiency. Shores also have other very impor tant functions in a damaged ship a. Support of straining bulkheads, deck s, doors and hatche s against abnormal pressures. b. Support for damaged and weakened structure and fittings. In both, the shoring is used to distribute the stress loading of straining or weakened members to sound parts of the structure. The principal wate rtight bulkheads are built to withstand the stresses that occur when compartments are flooded sta tically, and compartment s are tested during building to ensure that this is so. To conserve timber, therefore, and to avoid wasting valuabletime and labour, sound structure should not be s hored merely because the compartment on the other side is flooded. However, extensive dama ge in the vicinity may have weakened the structure and made it incapable of standing up to its designed st resses it must then be supported. Support is also needed for a bulkhead thrown ope n to the sea, to prevent its collapse under wave action or under pressure fro m movement through the water. In th is case, if no strain is apparent, only a little support is needed if strain is apparent, much more shoring is needed. 1623. Symptoms of Strain Straining of structure is usually readily apparent and can be recognised by a.Panting. This is the alternate bulging and contraction of plating often accompanied by a groaning or pinging noise caused by uneven pressure or locked upstresses. It is difficult to shore panting structure efficiently and a much better job can bedone if the ships speed is reduced, or the ships head turned away from the sea, until shoring is completed. If conditions will not pe rmit this, the shores should be fitted to the extreme of the outward movement. Alternativ ely, if there is a convenient securing point eg eyeplate or one can be welded on, the pla ting can be held in by wires or chains and lifting appliances. b.Buckling. Deck beams or bulkhead stiffe ners may buckle bulkheads or deck plating may bulge when under strain. c.Fracture or Splitting of Plating. This may occur alongside stiffeners or where bulkheads or decks abut on hull plating. It is often difficult to detect cracks that may be hidden under paint, oil or fittings. Great care is necessary when examining the structure and if strain is apparent shoring must be carried out immediately. It should not be pos tponed, because flooding may spread, causing an increase in draught with the consequent greater pressure on the structure and a further loss ofcompartments.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-12 UK RESTRICTED1624. Supporting Weakened Structure When structure has been weakened by dama ge, or has lost its normal means of support, shoring provides the best method of giving temporary support until mo re permanent measures are possible. If structure has been distorted, shoring should be used only to hold it to its new position. No attempt should be made to force if back to its original shape because this would probably induce further stresses a nd may cause complete rupture. 1625. Timber Shoring The main and best material for shores is softwood, ie pine or fir. It can be easily handled, cut, fastened and, compared to hardwood, has a higher strengthweight factor. The sizes most used for shores are 100mm by 100mm and 150mm by 150mm. Deal planking of sizes50mm and 75mm by 225mm are usual for pad pieces a nd packing, and the usual size of tongued and grooved planking is 32mm by 150mm. Batte n timber, used for tying a system of shores together, is 25mm by 75mm. Softwood wedges are used for setting up shores. Mild steel dogsstaples, and nails are used for securing shor es, pad pieces and battens together. When stowed onboar d, the shores, planks and battens should be cut to the greatest length that can be moved through the ship. 1626. Adjustable Steel Shores The adjustable steel shore consists of two telescopic, tubular steel sections, supplied in two sizes, 1.75m extending to 3.1m and 1m extendi ng to 1.68m. It is fitted with head and base plates and provided with a screw jack, with drop handle, for fine adjustments. These shores can only take loading along their lengths. Any late ral loading will distort them, so they should only be used as vertical or breast shores, never as proud shores. They must not be hit with hammers or dented, as any distortion to the outer case ma y prevent the inner part from sliding freely, thus making adjustments difficult or impossible. 1627. When adjustable shores are stowed either vertically or horizontally, the pin should be located through a hole in the inner tube, below th e screwed collar, which should be near to the bottom of the thread to allow for maximum adjustment. 1628. It is essential that an adjustable shore is carried correctly to a void hazards to personnel. A shore must be carried vertically, with the th readed portion uppermost. The pin must be fully inserted just below the rotating collar. To prevent the pin from moving it must be held in place,as shown in Fig 16-8. The other hand should grasp the shore at a point one third of its length up g47 from the base.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-13 Change 3 Fig 16-8. Carrying an Adjustable Steel Shore g47 1629. Adjustable shores may be used for permanent shoring during peace time damage situations, when ship motion is unlikely to displace them, but they must be regularly inspected.They are always to be used in conjunction with w ooden pad pieces to a. Reduce the danger of slipping.b. Spread loading on the structure.c. Prevent damage to GRP splinter boxes. 1630. After use all moving parts of the shore should be lightly oiled before stowage, to prevent seizure. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-14 UK RESTRICTED 1631. Tools for Shoring The following tools, required for s horing, are stowed at FRPP lockers a. 7lb 3.15kg hammer.b. 2lb 910g hammer.c. Cross cut wood saw.d. Gunter batten. 1632. Gunter Battens Gunter battens are used for measuring the length to which shores are to be cut. Guidance for their manufacture and use is given in Figs 16-9 to 16-11. Two sizes should be made, one g47 1500mm long and the other 750mm. Fig 16-8. Gunter Batten - Manufacturing DetailsUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-15 Change 3 Fig 16-10. Use of Gunter Batten to Measure Length of Vertical Shore g47 Fig 16-11. Use of Gunter Batten to Measure Length of a Proud Shore g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-16 UK RESTRICTED1633. Principles of Shoring The essentials for shoring to be effective are a. Strong and rigid anchorage for the shores.b. A reasonably complete ne twork of reinforcement. c. Distribution of the load over as large an area as possible. The method of shoring to be adopt ed depends on the extent of da mage and the character of the structure in the vicinity. The aim should be to s hore to the nearest strong point. If the nearest structure is not strong enough, the shoring must be continued back, th rough other compartments if necessary, to end at members of the necessary strength. The shoring assembly must always bekept under observation because if it beco mes strained it will itself need support. 1634. General Rules for Shoring There are certain rules generally applicable to all types of shoring, whether for bulkheads, decks, doors or hatches. They are a. A timber shore s hould never be longer than th irty times its minimum width or thickness. b. Ideally, the head and heel of a shore should abut on stiffened plating by a deck beam or bulkhead stiffener. This is not always possible, in which case wooden pad pieces should be used to spread the load. c. Shores should never be cut in anticipa tion, for any distortion of structure would make them useless. d. Shores must never be placed in position be fore damage occurs they would transmit shock and make the damage greater. e. Wedges should be used in opposing pairs. The two wedges should be driven in simultaneously or a heavy weight held ag ainst one while the other is driven in. f. A system of shores should be tied to gether with battens and dogs or nails. g. Careful watch must always be kept on shoring and any loosening attended to immediately. 1635. Methods of Shoring There are three methods of shoring a.Vertical Shoring , for hatches and decks and for leakstopping devices on them. See Figs 16-12 to 16-14. A vertical shor e must be cut approx imately 50 mm shorter g47 than the measurement between the deck pad piece and the deckhead, to allow for thewedges used to harden it into position.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-17 Change 3 b.Square Shoring , for bulkheads, ships side plating, watertight doors and for leakstopping devices on them. A proud shor e is sometimes needed to achieve square shoring. A proud shore is a shore cut longer than the height between decks add 20mm, the head placed against a girder or a welded-on lug, and the heel jammed on the deckbelow. A breast shore is then carefully cut to jam down as nearly horizontal as possible between the proud shore and the structure to be supported. With accurate cutting of the shores, wedges are unnecessary. However, should wedges be necessary, they are best used at the heel of the breast shore where it butts against the proud shore. Figs 16-2 and 16-14 illustrates this arrangement. c.V Shoring , for vertical structures. This is not as simple as square shoring. See Figs 16-15 and 16-16. Fig 16-12. Vertical Shoring - Decks g47 Fig 16-13. Vertical Shoring - Single and Double g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-18 UK RESTRICTED Fig 16-14. Vertical Shoring - Hatch g47 Fig 16-15. Square Shoring - Door g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-19 Change 3 Fig 16-16. V Shoring - Bulkhead Elevation g47 Fig 16-17. V Shoring - Bulkhead Plan g47 1636. Basic Instructions for Shoring Details of more elaborate syst ems of shoring are given in la ter paragraphs, but the basic rules are a.Bulkheads. The first and most effective shore on an intact but straining bulkhead should be at the centre of the bulge or, if the strain is due to wate r pressure on the other side, at one-third of the height and at the centre of width of the bulkhead. Full advantage must be taken of beams, pillars and heavy, fixed fittings to anchor the shores.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-20 UK RESTRICTEDb.Decks. Pad pieces will always be needed at both ends of a vertical store. For vertical shores to abut under a beam, pad pieces or shoring ma terial must be laid across under the beams. If a deck is bulging becau se of pressure underneath, the foot of the shore should be over the distortion if possible. If a number of vertical shores are to be fitted in line, a length of 100mm 100mm timb er should be used as a continuous pad piece. c.Watertight Door s and Hatches. The first shore should be set up on a pad piece on the door or hatch just clear of the clips along the side remote from the hinges. If needed, a second shore can be similarly set up along the side nearer the hinges. On a very big hatch, it may be n ecessary to set up four shor es Fig 16-14 but two will g47 generally be enough. Shores to doors and hatches must not be set up harder than necessary, because undue pressure w ill only tend to increase the leaking. 1637. If a vertical shore is being set up on an oily deck, efforts should first be made to clear the oil away using GP detergents andor suitable absorbing agents before using rough abrasive clothpaper doubled up to present the rough side to the surfaces in contact or rags, under the pad piece and the heel of the shore, to improve its grip. Wedges should be set under the heel unless flood water makes it impossible, when they should be set under the head. 1638. Spare. 1639. Multiple Shoring of Bulkheads Where no solid structure is available to take the thrust of shoring in the immediate vicinity, a system of multiple shoring must be a dopted to take the thrust back to the nearest strength structure. Examples of this shoring are illustrated in Figs 16-18 to 16-21. g47 1640. Long lengths of shoring timber are unwieldy, difficult to set up and, in addition, may be too long to get through the door or hatch of th e compartment in which they are required. With the types of multiple shoring illustrated, comparatively short lengths of timber can fulfil thepurpose. 1641. Breast shores should be set up to pad pieces against the bulkhead with their heels to a proud shore and be continued back and up a nd down if necessary through other proud and breast shores, or through V shoring, to the neares t strength structure. The whole system must be cross-tied by battens, with shores, pad pieces, cross-ties, packing and wedges secured by dogs and nails. Supporting chocks under the heads and heels of breast s hores give additional security against falling. Distance pieces between the heel of the proud shore and the nearest strength structure help prevent the possibility of slide-back. 1642. If slackening is observed, wedges and breast shores should be hardened-up and resecured with dogs or nails.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-21 Change 3 Fig 16-18. Multiple Square Shoring g47 Fig 16-19. Multiple Square and V Shoring g47 Fig. 16-20. Multiple Square and V ShoringBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-22 UK RESTRICTED Fig 16-21. Shoring a Longitudina l Bulkhead Various Methods g47 1643. Fabricated Shore Should it be necessary to use a long single shore in a compartment that has only a small access opening because machinery and fittings make the erection of multiple shoring impossible, the shore can be fabricated from short lengths of timber bolted together as illustrated inFig 16-22. Each length used should be the longes t length that can be passed through the access opening and the fabrication of the shore must be carried out in the compartment. Understandably, the use of a fabr icated shore cannot be a first ai d measure as the cutting, drilling and bolting together of the pieces will take time. A fabricated shore is not as strong as solid timber of the same dimensions. Fig 16-22. Fabricated Shore g47 1644. Shoring Training Allowance The allowance of 100mm 100mm shoring timber held at FRP Posts includes a 20 enhancement for training purposes. 1645. Machinery Spaces The erection of shoring in machinery spaces is difficult, and is almost impossible to achieve quickly, due to the large deck heights, and machinery and pipe systems which impede such work. Structures which require to be supported need to be shored from nearby, sound structures, while patches to the ships side, and some bulkheads, can be supported by using Emms clamps.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-23 Change 3 1646. The Emms Damage Repair Clamp This item is designed to be used in pa irs and can replace proud shoring systems when supporting patching or other leakstopping devices. Fig 16-23. Standard Emms Clamp g47 Its use alleviates the problems of access and stowage associated with providing long lengths of shoring timber in such spaces, and allows shorin g to be cut to shorter lengths as required. 1647. Three types of Emms clamp are provided a.Standard Small. For use with 100mm 100mm shoring. b.Standard Large. For use with 150mm 150mm shoring or double 100mm 100mm shoring, in large ships only. c.Universal. For use with 100mm 100mm shoring in ships with offset bulb P section frames. 1648. The damage repair clamps for main machinery spaces MMS form part of the contents of the damage repair tool box, which is held in these spaces, or they may be secured to shipsframes high up in the MMS, near to the access hatch or air lock. The damage repair clamps forthe FRPP form part of the contents of the damage control locker. Full details of allowances forRN and RFA ships are in BR 21703. 1649. The standard Emms clamp is made in two parts, each with an end shaped to fit over the g47 flanges of either T bar or bulb frames. One pa rt is welded to a box section, and the other free section is secured to it by means of a captive, double start threaded bolt and wingnut. The two parts of the clamp can be secured to T bars by fitting the shaped ends over the flange and thentightening up on the wingnut. For fitting over bulb an gle the free part should be reversed and the wingnut tightened. The box section is designed to hold standard damage re pair shores which are held in position with opposed we dges and, if necessary, nails.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 16-24 UK RESTRICTED1650. The clamps are secured to ships frames or longitudinals either side of the damaged area. Once in position and secured, a suitable length of shoring timber can be passed through the boxsections welded to each clamp, thus providing a strongback close to the damaged area againstwhich a splinter box or patch can be shore d, wedged, dogged and nailed, using a pad piece if g47 necessary see Fig 16-23. Two clamps can be used in tandem to extend the distance of the g47 strongback from the damaged area. 1651. These repair clamps are not proof tested and therefore must not be used as beam clamps for lifting purposes. Consequently a tally marked FOR DAMAGE CONTROL PURPOSESONLY is fitted to each clamp. 1652. The standard Emms Clamp was designed to fit on T section frames. It will not fit offset g47 bulb frames eg in Type 23, LPH, HMS SCOTT and RFAs. The Universal Emms Clamp see g47 Fig 16-24 is used in these ships. It is attached to the frame by a screwed clamp and the box g47 section swivels to give versatility in the orientation of the shoring. Fig 16-24. Universal Emms Clamp g47 1653. The small standard clamp may be clamped ont o the universal clamp, in tandem. The universal clamp cannot be clamped onto either of the standard clamps.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 17-1 Change 1CHAPTER 17 NBCD ARRANGEMENTS IN ICY CONDITIONS CONTENTS Para H i g h P r e s s u r e S e a W a t e r H P S W S e r v i c e ................................ 1702 g47 Prewetting ......................................................... 1707 Scuppers and Drains ................................................. 1708 F r e s h W a t e r S y s t e m s ................................................. 1709 Ventilation ......................................................... 1710 W e a t h e r d e c k T e r m i n a l s ............................................... 1711 P o r t a b l e F i r e f i g h t i n g A p p l i a n c e s i n E x p o s e d P o s i t i o n s....................... 1712 Stability ........................................................... 1713 C i t a d e l O p e n i n g s .................................................... 1714 D o o r a n d H a t c h C l i p s a n d H i n g e s ....................................... 1715 B a t t e r i e s ........................................................... 1716 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 17-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 17-3 Change 1CHAPTER 17 NBCD ARRANGEMENTS IN ICY CONDITIONS 1701. ATP17 - Naval Arctic Manual, contains information on operatin g in ice. Certain aspects of NBCD can be affected by icy conditions and the following paragraphs are intended as information for ships officers on the design arrangements called for by the Ministry of DefenceNavy in dealing with these conditions, and the ways in which a ship can deal with them. 1702. High Pressure Sea Water HPSW Service g47 All mains and branches which are exposed to the weather, or which supply hydrant valves in exposed positions, are fitted with drain down arrangements. 1703. Whenever possible, hydrants and magazine locker flood pipes in exposed positions have an additional valve in the branch supply well insi de the main structure, so arranged that the exposed length of supply pipe can be drained a nd left empty. PVC or polythene covers should be used to cover hydrants. Hoses and nozzles in exposed positions should be as dry as possible g47 internally or re-located between decks. g47 1704. Attention is given to the insu lation of all supply pipes, in cluding flanges which, although not in exposed positions, are likely to be subjected to very low te mperatures, eg those near lift openings in aircraft carriers. Similar precautions are made for the spraying arrangements to any magazines or magazine lockers in exposed pos itions, but some difficulty may be experienced where the spray piping is dead end and has no flow-through. The main supplies to hangar spray g47 systems are insulated as far as the control valves. g47 1705. Where the extreme fore and aft ends of the HP sea water system are in exposed positions, g47 leak-offs are fitted to ensure a continuous circul ation of water. The leak-offs should be 12mm diameter, well-insulated and so a rranged to discharge either dir ectly overboard or into a scupper with a warmed storm valve. 1706. Hoses and nozzles will perform satisfactorily at freezing temperatures, if the water is kept g47 flowing and a good pressure is maintained. After use, they should be drained, taken between g47 decks for drying and replaced by dry hoses and nozzles. g47 1707. Prewetting The arrangement of prewetting systems is su ch that the supply pipes drain down after use. If difficulty is experienced with the co mplete draining of any pipe, it should be blown through with LP air. Nozzles should be cl eared of ice by sea water hosing or manually. 1708. Scuppers and Drains Decks and platforms are equipped with sufficient drains to eliminate the formation of pools of water. Arrangements are made to prevent, as far as possible, the ingress of water toexposed deck equipment, or ready drainage is fitted. 1709. Fresh Water Systems Piping in exposed positions or in positions lik ely to be subjected to low temperatures is insulated and steam or electrically heated. Fr ost plugs are fitted in positions of ready access. Care should be taken that insu lation does not interfere with an y working parts of the system.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 17-4 UK RESTRICTED1710. Ventilation Heating systems are designed to maintain a minimum temperature of 18.3C in living and working spaces. Low humidities are avoided by limiting fresh air intake . Thermal insulation is fitted to cold surfaces inside the ship to re duce heat transfer losses and prevent condensation. Insulation is fitted to the weather boundaries in all living, working and other spaces where condensation must be avoided, a nd to all fresh air trunking where it passes through such spaces. 1711. Weatherdeck Terminals The hinges and clips of all weatherdeck ve ntilation terminals should be treated with a de-icing compound. 1712. Portable Firefighting Applia nces in Exposed Positions Whenever possible, portable firefighting app liances that are likely to freeze should be stowed in sheltered positions. Diesel fuel syst ems in portable pumps are liable to blockage by g47 waxing at very low temperatures. AFFF drums and AFFF extinguishers should be stowed in g47 their heated lockers where provided. On no account should anti-freeze be added to AFFF extinguishers because of the danger of AFFF losi ng its fire extinguishing properties but see g47 Chapter 23 for freeze protection of exposed AFFF drums in excepti onal conditions. CO2 and g47 dry powder extinguishers are unaffected by cold weather. 1713. Stability Heavy icing on the weatherdeck, superstructure and weatherdeck, fittings and equipment will adversely affect the stability of the ship due to the additional topweight see Chapter 31. g47 Every effort must be made to prevent the information of ice and to remove it as quickly aspossible when it has formed. The methods used for ice prevention and removal are contained in ATP 17. 1714. Citadel Openings Careful attention must be gi ven to keeping the jointing portion of the door rubbers dry in order that they will not freeze to their seatings on the door coamings. 1715. Door and Hatch Clips and Hinges All grease nipples should be charged, and clip barrels and hinges should be smeared with de-icing compound. 1716. Batteries g47 Low temperature reduces the output of all types of batteries, so those required for g47 damage control purposes must be kept in a warm area. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 18-1 Change 1CHAPTER 18 VENTILATION CONTENTS Para Methods of Ventilation not including Air Conditioning ..................... 1802 NBCD Uses of the Ventilation System ................................... 1803 Z o n i n g ............................................................ 1804 Galley Ventilation Systems ............................................ 1805 Sources of information on Ship Ventilation ............................... 1807 BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 18-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 18-3 Change 1CHAPTER 18 VENTILATION 1801. Ventilation is needed in ships for three principal reasons a. To provide sufficient oxygen to ensure the health and alertness of the ships company, in all climates and conditions of service. b. To maintain tolerable temperatures. c. Remove foul air, noxious and toxic fu mes, smoke and combustible or explosive vapours. 1802. Methods of Ventilation not including Air Conditioning a.Fan Supply - Natural Exhaust. The fan supply is trunked to manned positions and exhausted naturally to the open air either by trunking or thr ough doors and hatches. b.Fan Exhaust - Natural Supply. This is used for the removal of fumes, vapours, odours, wild heat and, for NBCD purposes, smoke from compartments. Some ships have dedicated sm oke clearance fans. c.Fan Supply - Fan Exhaust. Compartments such as machinery compartments, galleys, bathrooms and laundrie s, where maximum ventilati on and heat dissipation are the prime requirements, are ventilated by this method. 1803. NBCD Uses of the Ventilation System a.NBC Collective Protection. Ships ventilation systems, in conjunction with air filtration units AFUs, are used by the NBCD organisation to achieve Condition Alfa and additionally in some ships to be able to achieve gastight sub-citadels seeBR 21702 and CB 4538 - Ships Class Book. b.Re-circulation Systems. Most ships are fitted with Air Treatment Units ATUs which form an important and integral part of the ventilation system. This systemincorporates a continuous make up suppl y of fresh air which is led into the recirculation system and air conditioned by the ATUs. The recirculation system uses trunking, hatches, doors, grille s and passageways to allow the air to flow around the system. In the event of a fire the smoke would quickly be circulated around the system and soon render the atmosphere irrespirable . To prevent this from happening and to restrict the supply of oxygen to a fire all ventilation systems are stopped on the report of an outbreak. c.Smoke Containment or Removal of Smoke from a Fire. Information regarding this problem is to be found in Annex K to Chapter 21, Ships NBCD Orders and the Smoke Clearance Plans associated with Fo rms S.3021 Kill Cards. Details of the Ramfan portable smoke clearance fan are in Chapter 22.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 18-4 UK RESTRICTED1804. Zoning To minimise the areas affected by damage or fire modern surface ships are divided into zones which are able to operate independently see Chapter 29. To align with this policy each zone is provided with its own air conditioning and ventilation systems which do not penetrate zone boundaries. AFUs, of the required cap acity, are also provided for each zone. 1805. Galley Ventilation Systems Galley exhaust ventilation system s are fitted with fire baffles in the trunking. The levers that operate them should be a. A simple single-action le ver directly controlling the baffle and located within 1.8m to 3m of the deep fat fryer or range ca nopy, and between the ca nopy and galley access. b. Easily operated by a person standing on the deck.c. Clearly marked in red lettering SHUT IN THE EVENT OF FIRE. 1806. A second operating position for the baffle should be located just outside the main galley entrance, adjacent to the ventilation and galley mast er switches. If a galle y is fitted with two or more doors, and the fire baffle control lever is sited remotely at one of them, the doors not having the fire baffle control lever adjacent should be clearly marked FIRE BAFFLEOPERATING LEVER AT ...... 1807. Sources of Information on Ships Ventilation More detailed information regarding the design, construction and usage of ventilation systems is to be found in the following a.Naval Engineering Standards NES 1 NES 102, Part 1 - Requi rements for Air conditioning and Ventilation - HM Surface Ships and Royal Fleet Auxiliaries. 2 NES 118 - Material Requirements for the NBC Defence of Surface Ships including RFAs. b.Books of Reference BR 1 BR 200060 - Naval Marine Engineering Practice HULL. 2 BR 1. Refer to Air conditioning and Ventilation in the alphabetical index of subjects for details of specific ships and systems. c.Drawings 1 Ships ventilation drawings.2 Ships ventilation board in HQ1.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-1 Change 3CHAPTER 19 ELECTRICAL ASPECTS OF DAMAGE CONTROL CONTENTS SECTION 1 - ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT Para Main Supply System ................................................. 1902 D i s t r i b u t i o n S y s t e m s ................................................. 1905 C i r c u i t B r e a k e r s ..................................................... 1906 Main Switchboards .................................................. 1907 S u p p l i e s t o S e r v i c e s .................................................. 1908 A l t e r n a t i v e S u p p l i e s.................................................. 1909 Converted Supplies .................................................. 1910 S y s t e m O p e r a t i o n.................................................... 1911 B r e a k e r C o l o u r C o d e s ................................................ 1912 C o n t r o l o f T h e E l e c t r i c a l S y s t e m........................................ 1913 Switchboard Primary Control .......................................... 1914 Switchboard Secondary Control ........................................ 1915 Operation of the Main Supply System .................................... 1916 Action Parallelling ................................................... 1917 E l e c t r i c a l S u p p l i e s t o H P S W P u m p s ..................................... 1918 S h i p s L i g h t i n g...................................................... 1920 A u t o m a t i c E m e r g e n c y L i g h t s A E L ..................................... 1921 E m e r g e n c y L i g h t i n g f o r R e p a i r P a r t i e s ................................... 1922 Emergency Supply Arrangements ....................................... 1924 P e r m a n e n t R i s e r s .................................................... 1926 Emergency Supply to Fuse Panels ....................................... 1927 E m e r g e n c y C o n n e c t i o n s............................................... 1928 Emergency 115 V AC Supplies ......................................... 1929 Emergency 440 V Cables .............................................. 1930 E l e c t r i c a l S u p p l i e s t o P o r t a b l e P u m p s .................................... 1932 B a t t e r y O p e r a t e d L a n t e r n s ............................................. 1934 g47 B a t t e r y O p e r a t e d H e a d l a m p s C a p l a m p s ................................. 1935 g47 SECTION 2 - ELECTRICAL DAMAGE CONTROL PRACTICE E l e c t r i c a l D a m a g e C o n t r o l O f f i c e r D C O L .............................. 1940 N B C D E l e c t r i c a l I n f o r m a t i o n B o a r d ..................................... 1941 E m e r g e n c y C a b l e R u n D i a g r a m s ........................................ 1943 E l e c t r i c a l R e p a i r P a r t y ................................................ 1945 B l a n k e t S e a r c h i n g ................................................... 1946 E m e r g e n c y C a b l e R u n s ............................................... 1947 Procedure for Running Emergency Cables ................................ 1948 Switchboard Operators ................................................ 1949 N B C D S t a t e 1 E l e c t r i c a l P r e p a r a t i o n s .................................... 1950 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-3 Change 1CHAPTER 19 ELECTRICAL ASPECTS OF DAMAGE CONTROL SECTION 1 - ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT 1901. In warships, the continued s upply of electrical power under a ll conditions is essential for maximum fighting efficiency and may well be a deciding factor in a ships survival. Some of theimportant services and equipment that depend on electrical power are a. Control and operation of weapons and sensors. b. Internal and external communications.c. Steering gear.d. Aids to navigation.e. Ventilation and lighting.f. HPSW and salvage pumps.g. Lubricating oil and cont rolled pitch propeller pumps. g47 h. Ships propulsion.i. Chilled water.j. HP and LP air. 1902. Main Supply System Many important main-engine auxiliaries, ancillary equipment and ventilation fans are electrically driven. Several features in the electrical system of a ship are designed to limit theeffects of damage on e ssential power supplies and to enable supplies to be restored with minimum delay. They include a. Enough generator capacity to allow for possible failure of some generators. b. Dispersal of generators to obviate the ri sk of complete failure of electrical power from one hit. c. Secondary generation of power from diesel generators when primary generators are steam driven. d. Alternative supplies, and in some cases emergency supplies, immediately available to important services.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-4 UK RESTRICTEDe. Fuses and overcurrent prot ection in switchgear to isolate circuits and prevent damage to generators and equipmen t in the event of a short circuit. f. Shock-tested mountings and fittings to prevent the displacement of equipment, switchgear, fuses, etc, by underwater shock. g. Duplication of conversion machinery.h. Provision of an emergency genera tor in certain classes of ship. 1903. Main electrical supplies in ships are generally derived from diesel driven generators, however some older classes of sh ip may have steam driven genera tors, or a combination of both. The type of generator prime mover, genera tor output, and the number of generators are determined by the functions, general character istics and operational role of the ship. The generators will meet the maximum ships load usually the Action load with an adequate marginto allow for generator damage, defects and maintenance. A reserve of generation capacity is alsoallowed for, to meet any growth in electrical demands during the life of the ship. 1904. In the majority of warships, electrical power is generated at 440 volts V, 3 phase Ph, 60 hertz Hz alternating current ac. Howeve r, certain classes of ship eg Type 23 and LPDR, generate at a higher system volta ge to supply th e propulsion motors. Conversion machinery is employed to convert the high er voltage to the normal 440 V working level. Detailed information regarding th e generation and distribution of the main supply system can be found in the NBCD Class Book for the particular ship, or in the main electrical system BRs. 1905. Distribution Systems There are three different types of power and distribution systems commonly fitted in ships a. A simple system in which all the generators supply a common switchboard. b. An extension of the above system, wh ereby the switchboard is divided, with each generator supplying its own independent switchboard section. A DDFF normally has two such switchboards, each board having two sections. All the switchboards and sections are interconnected by breakers. c. In modern warships, major services are no longer supplied directly from a switchboard section. Equipments located in a particular section of the ship, and fitted for a particular purpose are grouped together and supplied from either an electrical distribution centre EDC, or an electrical distribution panel EDP. Services are fedfrom these EDCsEDPs via moulded case circuit breakers MCCBs. Hence these maybe considered to be sub-switchboards.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-5 Original1906. Circuit Breakers Each generator is connected to its associat ed switchboard or switc hboard section through a supply breaker contained in the switchboard. A breaker is fundament ally a hand-operated or electrically operated switch. The difference between switches and breakers is that breakersincorporate protection and safety devices which enable them to open automatically should a fault condition arise. Breakers are therefore normally fitted for the protection of main generators, forall main interconnections betw een switchboards, and all major feeders, where switch and fuse units cannot be used. In modern ships, each EDCEDP consists of a number of MCCBs. 1907. Main Switchboards A ships main switchboard pr ovides facilities for controllin g the voltage and frequency of generators, and their synchronization when need ed for parallel running. In ships with remote machinery control from an MCR or SCC the sw itchboard is normally located in the MCRSCC. In some instances where the main switchboard is remote from the generato r, local control panels LCPs are provided. Secondary switchboards are also normally provided. All switchboards are dead-fronted to prevent any exposure to the system voltage. 1908. Supplies to Services All services are supplied through breakers or, for more lightly loaded circuits, by switch and fuse units. These breakers and switches ar e known as feeder breakers and feeder switches, and the circuits are feeder circuits. 1909. Alternative Supplies Some electrically driven equipment in HM ships is considered to be of sufficient importance to justify the provision of two or more power supplies. These are fed via changeover switches to allow the connection of an alte rnative supply if the normal supply should fail. Changeover switches are sited as close to the equipment as possible to minimize the risk ofpower failure due to local circuit damage a.Automatic Changeover Switch ACOS. These are provided for equipment considered vital to the safety of the ship. They will automatically change the incomingsupply from normal to alternative should the normal voltage drop to 80 per cent of nominal, and will revert auto matically to the normal s upply should the normal supply be restored. b.Hand Changeover Switch HCOS. Automatic changeover switches must be limited in number otherwise rema ining generators could be loaded beyond their capacity. If a short delay in restoring power to a particular equipment is acceptable, then a handchangeover switch is fitted see Fig 19-1. Examples of equipments fitted with changeover switches are AUTOMATIC HANDForced lubrication pumps VentilationConversion machinery HPSW pumpsBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-6 UK RESTRICTED Fig 19-1. Hand Changeover Switch c.Electrical Distribution Panel EDP. EDPs that are fitted in certain classes of ships are divided into three different types 1 Remotely Operated Changeover Switch ROCOS. This type is remotely controlled and allows an ope rator to select the Normal or Alternative supply from a remote position normally the SCC, or locally at the EDP. 2 Automatic Changeover Switch ACOS. In this mode, the EDP operates as a normal ACOS. 3 Sheddable. These EDPs are operated, either automatically as part of machinery operation, or manually from a re mote position SCC, forward or after switchboards or locally at the EDP. Note. ROCOS and ACOS EDPs have input and output emergency sockets, whereas sheddable panels have emer gency output sockets only.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-7 Change 31910. Converted Supplies Lighting and small power services, including portable apparatus, lo wer voltage supplies at 115 V, three phase and single phase, are pr ovided by transformer conversion from the 440 V system. Various services, eg radar and wea pon control systems, need ac and dc supplies at voltages and frequencies different from those of the main supply. These are provided by conversion machinery, ie motor-d riven generators, static fre quency changers, transformers rectifiers and batteries, as a ppropriate. Where the converted supply is peculiar to a specific equipment the necessary conversion machinery is of ten sited nearby. It is usual to provide a common conversion machinery room at the load centre of all services concerned. 1911. System Operation a. The distribution system should not normally be arranged so that the normal and alternative supplies are taken from the same generator, or generators sited in the samecompartment or, in steam ships, ge nerators fed by the same boiler. b. Generators may fail at any time without warning. When this happens, all services being supported by a failing generator, thr ough automatic change over switches, will be transferred automatically to the generator providing the a ppropriate alte rnative supply. Therefore, each individual generator must not be fully loaded a margin must be left toallow each generator to accept the load thrown over when automatic changeover switches operate as a result of the failure of another generator. c. At higher states of NBCD readiness, the main supply system must be manned and operated such that sudden failure of a generator does not hazard the ship. 1912. Breaker Colour Codes In older ships switchboard switche s and breaker controls are co lour coded to indicate the importance of the service supplied by the switche s and breakers, and to assist the watchkeeper in selecting priorities when load shedding. In modern ships with MCCBs and ECDs feedingmultiple services, major services should be liste d at the primary and secondary control positions adjacent to feeder breaker operating switches. Colour coding should be employed against each major service. The colours are BLUE SEAGOING EFFICIENCY - steering, gyro, machinery space lighting and power, navigation radar, etc. RED FIGHTING EFFICIENCY - turretmountinglauncher supplies, magazine lighting, ammunition hoists, sensors, etc. GREEN NBCD SUPPLIES - HPSWhangar spraysalvage pumps, air conditioning units and ventilation, etc. WHITE LESS IMPORTANT SUPPLIES - refrigerators, galley equipment, etc.YELLOW UNIMPORTANT SUPPLIES - unimportant lighting and ventilation, heaters, etc.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-8 UK RESTRICTED1913. Control of The Electrical System The complexity of the ships electrical system requires a high degree of central control, so that the general state of supplies throughout the ship can be assesse d and the supplies handled quickly and easily. This becomes increasingly important when damage is sustained and only limited supplies are available. In such ci rcumstances the function of control is a. The even distribution of load among int act generators by the control of switchgear and the shedding of le ss important services. b. The isolation of damage and the redir ection of supplies to important services. c. The cooperation of electricity supply and re pair parties in the restoration of power to damaged areas. 1914. Switchboard Primary Control In most modern warships the voltage and frequency of generators and the operation of supply, feeder, bus-bar linking and interconnecting breakers, are remotely controlled at a console in the MCRSCC this console is known as the Pr imary Control Position PCP. In ships where more than one switchboard exists, communicati ons are available between each switchboard, this communication usually being a combination of Rationalised Internal CommunicationsEquipment RICE, machinery space broadcast and telephone. 1915. Switchboard Secondary Control In large ships with a second NBCD headqua rters HQ2, a Secondary Control Position SCP is also fitted. Its function is to assume control if the PCP is out of action. The SCP is not necessarily provided with automa tic indication or remote contro l arrangements but the state of the main supply system may be recorded, on a hand worked mimic diagram, from information received from the PCP while active, or otherwise from outlying stations. This informationenables the SCP to coordinate the remaining switchboards and outlying electrical positions to direct and maintain power supplies. In more m odern warships SCPs are situated adjacent to each main switchboard. From these positions local ma in switchboards can be operated in the event of failure of the PCP. 1916. Operation of the Main Supply System Instructions for the operation of the Main a nd Emergency supply systems of the ship are outlined in the associated NBCD Class book, and are detailed in BR 200052 - Electrical Power, g47 Distribution and Utilisation, BR 300 - Naval W eapons Engineering Manua l and relevant main power supply system BRs. The electrical stat e of readiness should conform to the ships NBCD State. At NBCD State 1, all generators are to be proved by placing on lo ad. Generators which are running should be independently supplying their own switchboard sections via supply g47 breakers andor bus bar linking breakers. The sub- division of the main supply system in this way g47 minimises the effect of any damage to the syst em. Switchboard operations should be kept to a minimum. Where it is required to parallel generators to transfer load, then the operation should be completed as quickly as possible. Care must be taken during the transfer to ensure that thegenerator frequencies do not deviat e to a level likely to affect frequency conscious equipment. Consideration should be given to opening M CCBsbreakers that supply non-important services as part of State 1 preparations. This removes unnecessary 440 V from compartments, thus reducing the risk of electrical shock to firefighters and faults to the primary electrical distributionsystem.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-9 Change 11917. Action Parallelling In the event of a generator or its prime mover becoming damaged necessitating the quick removal of its load, then action parallelling s hould be employed. This is where the affected generator is parallelled with an unaffected generator that has sufficient spare load capacity, suchthat it is able to accept the load from the failin g generator. Once the two generators are in parallel, the off-going generators supply breaker is opened, this immediately transfers the load and allows for the immediate shut down of the affected generator. 1918. Electrical Supplies to HPSW Pumps HPSW pumps are provided with both normal a nd alternative supplies some classes of ship are capable of providing a third supply from an emergency generator. Under standard operating conditions the HPSW pumps should be fed from their normal supply to ensure maximum diversity of supplies. Every effort must be made to ensure electrical supplies aremaintained to the HPSW pumps. In the event of possible interruptions to these supplies due toload transfer, battle damage etc it is essential that the DCOL, via the DCO, keeps the FRPPsinformed of any possible interruptions. For p eacetime emergencies the Se nior Rating IC of the firefighting team will be kept informed by the DCO. In the event of a fire which requires re-configuration of the main supply system, care must be taken to ensure that, wherever possible, HPSW pumps in use are fed from se parate generato rs or supplies. 1919. All HPSW pump starters are f itted with a lockable switch know n as the Battle Override switch. The purpose of this switch is to preven t the operation of the electrical safety devices fitted within the starter and thus prevent th e pump from tripping under fault conditions. This switch is to be unlocked in NBCD State 2 and made in NBCD State 1. 1920. Ships Lighting Almost without exception, some lighting w ill fail when action damage is sustained. General lighting is not provided with alternative supplies but, to prevent a complete blackout a. In important spaces, and in gangways, two electrically separate and widely dispersed sources each supply half the lighting. b. In some generator and sw itchboard rooms, a proportion of the lighting is supplied directly from the live side of generator supply breakers. c. Switchboard rooms, radar offices, HQ1S CC and other operational spaces may also be provided with battery-opera ted secondary lighting. This is in addition to the automatic emergency lights. 1921. Automatic Emergency Lights AEL AELs are normally fitted adjacent to doorways and hatchways to indicate their position in the event of a power loss affecting lighting. AELs are also sited adjacent to some machinerycontrols, in hazardous areas such as galleys a nd on escape routes. They are battery fed and are operated by relays connected to the main supply system. They switch on automatically if power in the space fails but give only enough illuminati on for movement between decks. AELs are fitted with a special battery which is trickle charged, thus ensuring the emergency lighting isavailable at all times. The charging supply is indicated by a neon lamp.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-10 UK RESTRICTED 1922. Emergency Lighting for Repair Parties When normal lighting fails, the provision of emergency lighting for repair parties and others to carry out their duties is of paramount importance. Various items of equipment, details of which are in BR 21703, are provided fo r this purpose. The principal items are a. Moulded strip lighting circuits DC neck laces which can be c onnected to a source of 115 V emergency supply. b. 115 V floodlights see Fig 19-2.c. Portable, battery-operate d equipment comprising 1 Lanterns for general use of repair pa rties see Fig 19-13. This equipment is g47 splashproof but not watertight. 2 Safety torches.3 Lamps for repair par ties and medical parties. 4 Right angle torches. d. Cyalume chemical illuminators.Note. In areas which are suspected or known to contain flammable or explosive vapours, only safety torches or cyalume illuminators may be used. Fig 19-2. Damage Control FloodlightUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-11 Change 11923. When emergency lighting is being rigged, care must be taken to ensure that watertight integrity is not breached by the cables. Th e closing of doors and hatches forming smoke or watertight boundaries should not be impeded by allowing cables to pass through them. 1924. Emergency Supply Arrangements Emergency supplies are distributed in two wa ys. Either via portable, flexible, cables, normally run along the communications deck, thus giving relatively free fore-and-aft access for repair parties, or by a hard wired system supplied from an emer gency salvage generator via an emergency switchboard to a number of ships vita l services eg HPSW pumps, steering gear and emergency portable pump sockets. In some classes of ships it can be a combination of these twomethods. These cables are never to be rigged un til required in an action damage situation, unless ordered by HQ1 or their designate. In some ships, where there are passageways on both sides of the communication deck, facilities are provided for port and starboard systems. 1925. In some ships with a large number of deck s, provision is made for emergency supply systems to be run on two deck levels the comm unication deck and one other. Permanent cables are run to these decks from generators and sw itchboards. Where emergency cable runs are required to pass through water tight bulkheads, special throug h-bulkhead connection boxes are provided. 1926. Permanent Risers Where it is necessary to transfer emergency power from one deck to another, two methods are used a. Short vertical lengths of cable are fitted permanently through watertight deck glands where watertight or gastight integrity must be maintained. These permanent cables arecalled risers. b. Deck tubes with removable caps are fitted for the passage of cables where watertight or gastight integrity is not a prime consideration. The caps are painted whitewith a green cross. 1927. Emergency Supply to Fuse Panels Some fuse panels suppling important services are fitted with normalemergency g47 changeover switches and emergency connections. In earlier ships the first fuse panels supplied from the switchboard breakerswitc hes were fitted with these arra ngements. In later ships the panels fitted with emergency arrangements have been limited to those supplying important services. Only the necessary panels, which ma y not be the first afte r the switchboard breaker switch, are so fitted. 1928. Emergency Connections Facilities for obtaining emergency power are provided at all main switchboards or generator LCPs in the form of emergency so cket connections fed from the bus-bars through switch and fuse units. All ends of permanent risers are terminated by emergency connection boxes ECBs and so, by means of flexible cab les having suitable conn ectors at each end, the main emergency run can be energized from available power sources. Similarly, at all importantBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-12 UK RESTRICTED services there are f acilities for accepting emergency power. The facilities comprise either an emergency switch and connection box fitted in the supply to the service or emergency socket connections in a fuse panel supplying a group of important services. Each type of facility includes a changeover switch to enable chan geover from normal to emergency supply. Distribution for these services is by portable emergency link boxes or portable fused distribution boxes, normally bolted to bulkheads at positions n ear the main emergency run. They can easily be made portable but when so used they must be earthed to the ships structure by connection to the earthing terminal provided. Details of emergency connections and equipment are shown in Figs 19-3 to 19-12. g47 Fig 19-3. Emergency Distribution BoxUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-13 Original Fig 19-4. Emergency Connection Box Fig 19-5. Emergency Thro ugh-Bulkhead TerminalBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-14 UK RESTRICTED 1929. Emergency 115 V AC Supplies These are taken from portable fused dist ribution boxes through portable 440115 V transformers Fig 19-6 and dist ributed via portable fuse boards Fig 19-7. Whenever portable equipment eg lighting transformers , fuse boards, etc is used, car e should be taken to protect it from damage and, if possible, it should be ke pt out of the way of personnel and moving equipment. Earth connections, where applicable, must always be secured and warning notices placed before power is supplied. The stowage positions of all portabl e electrical equipment should be clean and dry. Portab le fuse panels should carry the designated fuse links, and 115 V panels must have rubber sheets attach ed to guard exposed live terminals. Fig 19-6. Portable 440115 V TransformerUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-15 Change 2 Fig 19-7. Portable 115 V Fuse Board 1930. Emergency 440 V Cables In older ships, cables are pre-positioned, w ith fitted connectors. In newer ships Type 23, cables are manufactured, as required, from rolls of colour coded cables red, yellow and blue phases and crimped onto tails which have connector plugs fitted. The crimped buttconnectors should be insulated by wrapping insulating tape around them. The connectors and sockets have standard phase col ouring and, to assist phase identif ication by touch, a number one, two or three of raised rings are moulde d on the shroud of each cable connector and a corresponding number of raised lobes are on each socket. In addition, to make doubly sure, shrouds are moulded with one, two or three keyway s to fit corresponding numbers of keys in the sockets. Cable connectors are shown in Fig 19-8. Emergency cables are stowed on specialbrackets or reels, where they make small target s for splinters. They should not be rigged in position until required. To enable certain importa nt items of equipment to be connected to permanent risers, or to the main emergency run, they are provided with lengths of flexible cable which are stowed near the equipment. If l ong lengths of emergency cable are damaged and unusable, short lengths may be joined together by use of muff couplings Fig 19-9. The cable tails used in Type 23 and later ships are shown in Fig 19-10 and the contents of the cable lockers g47 are detailed in BR 4500120 - Emergency and Converted Electrical S upply Systems Type 23 g47 Frigates. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-16 UK RESTRICTED Fig 19-8. Emergency Cable Connectors Fig 19-9. Muff CouplingUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-17 Change 1g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 Fig 19-10. Cable Tails - T23 Frigates g47 1931. The stowages for all emergency cables are to be clearly marked, preferably with an embossed tally. Cables should be neatly stowed in their correct stowages with the connectors clear of the deck. The cables should be maintain ed strictly in accordance with the relevant MMS schedule. 1932. Electrical Supplies to Portable Pumps Switched sockets are provided at strategic positions throughout ships, for normal 440 V 3 Ph supplies to portable pumps see Fig 19-11. The socket boxes are painted yellow and g47 numbered in black. For connection to an emer gency supply, a special switched adaptor cable g47 rats tail is provided in ERP lockers see Fig 19-12. g47 1933. Type 23 Frigates and later ships are fitted with electrical pump power sockets g47 conforming to BS 4343. To enable pumps to be transferred between thes e ships and those fitted g47 with the older design of socket all pre T23 ship s, one adaptor lead per pump is supplied. There g47 are two types of adaptor leads g47 g47 a. Type A, for pre T23 ships. g47 g47 b. Type B, for T23, LPH and later ships. g47 g47g47 WARNING - 440 VOLTS g47 g47 POWER MUST BE ISOLATED AT THE SUPPLY SOCKET BEFORE THE g47 ADAPTOR LEADS ARE CONNECTEDDISCONNECTED. CONNECTORS MUST g47 BE KEPT DRY. g47 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-18 UK RESTRICTED Fig 19-11. Switched Portable Pump Supply Socket g47 g47 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 Fig 19-12. Switched Rats Tail g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-19 Change 1 1934. Battery Operated Lanterns g47 The allocation of battery operated lanterns see Fig 19-13 is three to each FRPP, plus g47 one each to sickbays, secondary medical positions a nd dental surgeries. Those allocated to these g47 medical stations are to be clearly marked as such. They are to be held by the appropriate MarineEngineering section for issue when assuming NBCD State 1. Lantern maintenance is limited to g47 replacement of the lamp or lens gasket, and recharging the two batteries using either the BC2 2way or BC10 10 way charger. The charging system is self regulating and the lantern may be g47 left on the charger until required for use. State of charge is indicated by lamps as follows a. Red lamp - charging.b. Green or green and red - charged. CAUTION LANTERN END CASINGS OR BATTERIES MUST NOT BE REMOVED AND g47 BATTERY SEALS ARE NOT TO BE REMOVED DURING RECHARGING. Fig 19-13. Battery Operated Lantern g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-20 UK RESTRICTED 1935. Battery Operated Headlamps Caplamps g47 The allocation of headlamps is nine per FRPP. Also one each to the Sickbay, SMP and g47 dental space and three to each First Aid Party, to be st owed in the Sickbay. Headlamp g47 maintenance is limited to a. Recharging of the battery using the BC 10 and BC2 chargers see Fig 19-14. The g47 charging indications are as fo r the lanterns in Para 1934. Headlamp batteries are sealed g47 during manufacture and are not to be topped up. Battery seals are not to be displaced or removed. b. Replacement of defective lamp filaments. Fig 19-14. Headlamp Battery Charger g47 1936 to 1939. Spare. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-21 Change 3SECTION 2 - ELECTRICAL DAMAGE CONTROL PRACTICE 1940. Electrical Damage Control Officer DCOL At NBCD State 1, the DCOL, in HQ1, is responsible for the integrity of the main electrical supply system, including converted supplies. Hi s detailed responsib ilities are listed in Chapter 2. 1941. NBCD Electrical Information Board To aid him in his duties, the DCOL has an Electrical Information Board. This board or boards comprises a. A simplified whole-ship incident board.b. Emergency supply system diagra m underground map see Fig 19-15. g47 c. Details of emergency cables number, length and current carrying capacity. d. Position and supply sources of portable pump connections. e. Diagram and details of the main electri cal supply system, incorporating the facility for logging generator and emergency supply outlet loadings. f. Availability of sources of supply to important services. g. Tote board, showing priority to be given to dama ge repair tasks. 1942. The electrical inci dent board should be sighted within view of the main NBCD incident board, and used to reflect the NBCD incidents i ndicated on the main boar d, eg fires, floods etc. It should be marked in the same manner and co lours as those used on the main NBCD incident board. NBCD incidents are not to be erased fro m the board when successfully dealt with, but left as a reminder that electrical equipment in that area must be testedinspected prior to use. Onceequipment in the affected area has been tested and its condition deter mined and recorded, then the incidents may be removed. The board should be restrained but portable, so that in the event of HQ1 having to be evacuated, then the incident board can be taken at the same time. Aduplicate of the el ectrical incident board should be ma intained at each FRPP and AHQ where manned at action. 1943. Emergency Cable Run Diagrams The DCOL is responsible for the issue of cable run diagrams underground maps to electrical repair teams. Initially information on individual cable runs is passed verbally over thegreen line. This information is then backed up by a cable run diagram. Authorised cable runsissued to electrical repa ir teams are to be indicated on th e cable run diagrams using continuous lines. It should be noted that in LPDCVS the i ssue of cable run diagrams is delegated to the FRPPs. The following procedure is to be followed a. Cable run diagrams Fig 19-15 are to be used as the primary method of authorising the running and powering-up of emergency cables.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-22 UK RESTRICTEDb Cable run diagrams are to be dispatched from HQ1 to FRPPs enclosed in plastic envelopes. c. The receipt of the cable run diagram is the normal authorisation to power-up, but in the absence of the diagram, and if the cable run is complete, then verbal confirmationfrom HQ1SCC is an acceptable alternative authorisation. d. Authorised cable runs are to be indicated on the NBCD electrical information board by broken lines until the run is complete, after which the line are made continuous. e. Authorised cable runs are to be indicated on the cable run diagrams using continuous lines, together with the following information 1 Time of issue.2 Estimated time back on line ETBOL. This should be in real time ie a four digit time. 3 Priority.4 Services to be supplied. f. The cable run must be indicated in total from the service to the source. Any connection point to an energised conduc tor must be clearly marked LIVE. g. On completion of a cable run, the FRP is to ensure that the cable run diagram is returned to HQ1. 1944. Whilst cable run diagrams are the authority for cable running teams to run and apply power to an emergency cable run, no time should be wasted waiting for the cable run diagram to be delivered prior to commencing the cable run as it may never get delivered. The cable run g47 diagram does not authorize starting of the equi pment which may be opera ting in a reversionary g47 mode. g47 1945. Electrical Repair Party The electrical L contingent at each FRPP normally consists of a senior rating as IC and at least two ratings they are identified by gr een surcoats. Each L team is under the control of the DCOL, but they may occasionally be employed on mechanical M damage repairactivities dependant on the damage scenario prevailing. Care must be taken to ensure that Lteams are not employed on tasks from which they cannot be easily recovered in the event of an L incident taking priority. It should be noted that the L teams usually operate from the switchboards in Type 23s with the switchboard ope rator as IC of the team. L teams are responsible for the following areas a. Emergency cable running.b. Blanket searching.c. Electrical damage repairs.d. Electrical State 1 preparations. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-23 Change 31946. Blanket Searching When a blanket search is ordered see Chapte r 8, the searches are to include inspections of EDCs, COSs and any action damage that ma y adversely effect the running of emergency cables eg damage to through-bul khead connectors or cables. The following is a general guide g47 on items to be checked g47 a.Electrical Distribution Centre g47 1 Check that the busbar supply lamp is illuminated. g47 g47 2 Check that the earth percentage meter reads zero. g47 g47 3 Open the MCCB cubicle door and check the following g47 g47 4 Check for unusual smells or burning. g47 g47 5 Check for breakers that have trippe d MCCB in the mid position, reset the g47 MCCB by switching it to the OFF positi on and then switching the breaker ON. g47 Should the MCCB again trip then annotate the EDC List. g47 g47 6 Check the MCCB fuzes are intact. g47 g47 7 Report any anomalies to the ic DC L team. g47 g47 b.Switchboard g47 g47 1 Carry out a full earth check on all sections of the switchboard. g47 g47 2 Carry out a full lamp test. g47 g47 3 Check all running generator parameters are within tolerance. Check AVRs g47 T23 only. g47 g47 4 Check condition of all main breakers. g47 g47 5 Check 440 volt 3 Phase output of all Emergency Supply Units ESUs. g47 g47 6 Rack In and functionally test shore supplyship alongside breaker. g47 g47 c.Conversion Machinery Room g47 g47 1 Check that NORMAL supply is sel ected on Automatic Changeover Switches g47 ACOS. g47 g47 2 Check state and rotating electrical conversion machinery are operating g47 correctly. g47 g47 3 Check Control and Communications sw itchboard parameters are correct and g47 carry out a full earth check. g47 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-24 UK RESTRICTEDd.General Equipment Checks g47 g47 1 Check availability of NORMAL and ALTERNATIVE supplies. g47 g47 2 In the event of loss of NORMAL and ALTERNATIVE supplies a report on g47 equipment serviceability should be rendered to DCOL at the earliest opportunity. g47 g47 3 Check all running and standby equi pment for damage. This should include g47 mechanical items such as shock mount s, associated pipework, bellows etc. g47 g47 1947. Emergency Cable Runs Personnel are in danger when live emergency cables are in use. Therefore competent ratings must properly supervise their use to ensure that all safety rules are followed. The ratingIC of the cable run must be in full possession of the facts relating to emergency cable running techniques and should carry a copy of the author ised cable run. Prior to commencing the cable run, the L repair team should r eceive a comprehensive brief from the IC of the L party on the required cable run and any po ssible associated hazards. 1948. Procedure for Running Emergency Cables The following rules are to be applied a. Wherever practical, personnel should work in pairs.b. Personnel must wear electrically resist ant rubber gloves see BR 21703 for shelf life. c. Before use, emergency facilities must be checked for earths and interphase short circuits if exposed to flood or fire damage. d. Emergency cable ends must be kept clear of the deck at all time. Where possible the whole cable should be kept clear of th e deck to prevent water contamination and abrasive damage. e. Cables must be run from the service to be supplied to the source of the supply. f. Care must be taken to ensu re that watertight integrity is not breached by the running of emergency cables and the effectiveness of smoke curtains is not compromised.Operating mechanisms should not be obstructed by emergency cables. g. Cables must not be hung from 1 Small bore pipework.2 Existing hard wired electric cabling.3 Any non-robust installation. h. Whenever possible, before connecting into emergency changeover switches, the switches are to be set to the OFF position until the correct number of live phases havebeen proved.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-25 Change 3i. Before changing the Emergency Supply Connection Box ESCB or fuse panel NormalEmergency changeover switch to EM ERGENCY, the absence of supply on the NORMAL side must first be verified. j. Before the supply to the emergency cable r un is energised, the installation must first be inspected by a competent rating. k. 440 volts warning notices must be secured to all live connection points. l. On completion of the emergency cable r un and when power has been applied, the emergency supply is not to be interrupted without prior permission from HQ1 unless there is a danger to personnel. 1949. Switchboard Operators In State 1, the main distribution system is under the overall control of the DCOL and should be operated by qualified switchboard opera tors from the secondary switchboards. One of the secondary switchboards is designated th e controlling switchboard. Having the secondary switchboards manned this wa y in State 1 serves several purpos es. Firstly it reduces manning in the SCCMCR and it ensures that any load tran sfers can be carried out using manual operation of breakers without the need to close up additi onal personnel. Where sw itchboards have control of ventilation supply breakers, these are to be opened at the order BRACE and re-closed approximately 15 seconds la ter. HQ1 is to be informed of th ese actions. Mimic diagrams of the supply system are to be maintained and ge nerator and emergency cable loadings where applicable are to be forwarded to the DCOL in HQ1 at regular intervals. 1950. NBCD State 1 Electrical Preparations g47 It is important that the initial material state of important electrical equipment is assessed g47 on closing down to NBCD State One. The following aspects are a general guideline g47 g47 a. Muster all Damage Control Electrical Party personnel and re port all manning to g47 DCOL in HQ1. g47 g47 b. Wibres, torches and dc electrical gloves c hecked and serviceable to be carried by g47 all Damage Control Electrical Personnel. g47 g47 c. Muster the electrical damage control locker contents and note any deficiencies for g47 early rectification. Ref erence BR 21703 Chapter 2 g47 g47 d. All portable pump sockets are to be checked for 440 volt 3 phases available. g47 g47 e. Check WEDA pumps for serviceabi lity and check that the pump suction area is g47 clear. g47 g47 f. Check all Hand Changeover Switches HCO S are in NORMAL supply. Check that g47 NORMAL and ALTERNATIVE supplies are available to the HCOS. Correct safety g47 precautions are to be adhered to in accordance with BR 200052. g47 g47 g. Check that NORMAL and ALTERNATIVE supplies are available to all automatic g47 Changeover Switches ACO S and that NORMAL supply is selected. g47 g47 h. Sight electrical damage control cables are in the correct stowage. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-26 UK RESTRICTEDi. All generators are to be run up and put on load interconnector breakers should be g47 OPEN. CVS to start all generators, c onduct running checks and assume state one g47 configuration with 4 generators on load. g47 g47 j. Check 440 volt 3 phase output from Emergency Supply Units. g47 g47 k. All conversion machinery running w ith Main L.P. batteries floating. g47 g47 l. All HPSW Pump battle override switches ar e to be unlocked with the switch put to g47 the override position. Not to be done for exercise purposes. g47 g47 m. Ensure the following CRETE is ava ilable in the relevant sections g47 g47 1 BM80 - one per DC team. g47 g47 2 Clip on Ammeters - one per switchboard. g47 g47 3 Cable repair kit to be readily available. g47 g47 4 RATS tool kits available and contents checked. g47 g47 n. All equipment is to be re-secured fo r action on completion of Start One Preps. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-27 Change 3 Fig 19-15. Emergency Supply System DiagramBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 19-28 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-1 Change 2CHAPTER 20 FIREFIGHTING ORGANISATION CONTENTS Para T e r m i n o l o g y........................................................ 2001 D u t y W a t c h O r g a n i s a t i o n s ............................................. 2003 SECTION 1 - FULL HARBOUR FIRE AND EMERGENCY PARTY ORGANISATION F i r s t A i d F i r e f i g h t e r s ................................................. 2007 M a i n G r o u p ........................................................ 2008 I C M a i n G r o u p ..................................................... 2009 A t t a c k P a r t y ........................................................ 2010 Support Party ....................................................... 2011 B A C o n t r o l l e r....................................................... 2012 W E S p e c i a l i s t....................................................... 2013 C o n t a i n m e n t P a r t y ................................................... 2014 T h e D u t y L W E M L O M ............................................... 2017 K e y s R a t i n g ........................................................ 2018 M E S p e c i a l i s t P a r t y .................................................. 2019 B r e a t h i n g A p p a r a t u s P a r t y............................................. 2020 B r e a t h i n g A p p a r a t u s D u m p ............................................ 2021 G a n g w a y S t a f f ...................................................... 2022 C o m m u n i c a t i o n s R a t i n g............................................... 2023 C o n t r o l P a r t y ....................................................... 2024 M e d i c a l F i r s t A i d .................................................... 2025 E m e r g e n c i e s........................................................ 2026 Identification of FF Personnel .......................................... 2028 F i r e f i g h t e r s C o m m u n i c a t i o n s .......................................... 2029 SECTION 2 - REDUCED AND MINIMUM HARBOUR FIRE AND EMERGENCY PARTY ORGANISATIONS R i s k .............................................................. 2033 R e d u c e d H F E P...................................................... 2035 M i n i m u m H F E P..................................................... 2037 SECTION 3 - HARBOUR FIRE AND EMERGENCY PARTY IN MMPP H F E P M a n n i n g ..................................................... 2041 G a n g w a y S t a f f ...................................................... 2043 O f f i c e r o f t h e D a y ................................................... 2044 F i r s t A i d F i r e f i g h t e r s ................................................. 2045 A t t a c k B A F i r e f i g h t e r s................................................ 2046BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-2 UK RESTRICTEDCONTENTS Continued Para D u t y S e n i o r R a t i n g D S R ............................................. 2047 D u t y T e c h n i c a l R a t i n g ................................................ 2048 D u t y F i r s t A i d e r D F A ............................................... 2049 Personnel Safety and Control ........................................... 2050 Responsibilities of N on-Duty Personnel .................................. 2051 E q u i p m e n t R e q u i r e m e n t s.............................................. 2052 J e t t y S p a c e ......................................................... 2054 SECTION 4 - FIREFIGHTING IN CONJUNCTION WITH LOCAL AUTHORITY FIRE BRIGADES L i a i s o n w i t h L o c a l A u t h o r i t y F i r e B r i g a d e s L A F B ......................... 2056 LAFB Priorities ..................................................... 2057 LAFBDLCOOD Liaison ............................................. 2058 S h i p S a f e t y......................................................... 2062 J e t t y S p a c e ......................................................... 2063 B r o w s ............................................................. 2064 P r o b a b l e Q u e s t i o n s .................................................. 2065 Missing Personnel ................................................... 2066 E l e c t r i c a l S u p p l i e s ................................................... 2067 R o u t e t o F i r e ....................................................... 2068 Control of Personnel ................................................. 2069 Employment of RNRFA Personnel ..................................... 2070 E v a c u a t i o n o f H Q 1 .................................................. 2071 C o m m u n i c a t i o n s .................................................... 2072 Disposal of RNLAFB Personnel ........................................ 2073 SECTION 5 - FIREFIGHTING AT SEA S t a n d i n g S e a E m e r g e n c y P a r t y S S E P ................................... 2076 S S E P O r g a n i s a t i o n i n D D F F a n d L a r g e r S h i p s ............................ 2079 C o n t a i n m e n t P a r t y ................................................... 2080 S S E P O r g a n i s a t i o n i n M M P P.......................................... 2086 UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-3 Change 2CHAPTER 20 FIREFIGHTING ORGANISATION 2001. Terminology Since the Harbour Fire and Emergency Part y HFEP and the Standing Sea Emergency Party SSEP deal with a variety of incidents such as fire, flood and structural damage the terminology describing the cont rol points for an incident are a.Scene of the Incident SOTI. The actual location of the incident. This will be under the immediate control of the IC Attack Party. b.Forward Control PointFCP. The elected control point of the IC Main Group. By definition this will be the single entry c ontrol point for entry to the SOTI. It should be located at the established smoke boundary fo r a fire situation, ie a watertight door or hatch. 2002. The Duty Watch is the smallest unit capable of fighting, or at least containing, a major outbreak of fire. It must be organised to provi de Specialist Personnel to maintain overall control of the incident and safety of the ship, a Main Group to locate, control and extinguish the fire as quickly as possible and a Contai nment Group to establish the boundari es of the fire and contain it. 2003. Duty Watch Organisations Three duty watch organisations are availabl e to ships in Fleet Time. They are a.Full HFEP. For use by ships outside of HM Naval Bases and for those ships recovering from a period of Upkeep. Lean manned ships should note Para 2032b. b.Reduced HFEP. Details of the Reduced HFEP are at Para 2035. Commanding Officers may consider this the standard organisation for use in HM Naval Bases but should take into account the factors at Para 2034 in deciding whether it is appropriate to their ships level of training and programme. It is expected that, in many cases wheresufficient personnel are available, Commanding Officers will consider that a Full HFEP better meets their requirements for training and their Duty of Care commitments. c.Minimum HFEP. Details of the Minimum HFEP are at Para 2037. The total manpower requirement is 18. It may be used in HM Naval Bases Portsmouth and Devonport to provide greater flexibility in manpower management and should take into account the factors at Para 2034. 2004. Ships intending to use a Reduced or Min imum HFEP should ensure that the MOD Area Fire Prevention Officer is informed.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-4 UK RESTRICTEDSECTION 1 - FULL HARBOUR FIRE AND EMERGENCY PARTY ORGANISATION 2005. This section sets out a flexible organisation for the composition of the Full Fire and Emergency Party of all ships in ha rbour, whether at anchor or along side outside a Fleet base. The number of hands forming each of the groups de tailed in the following paragraphs are the recommended minimum based on the capability of a fully manned frigate and if they cannot be met, the risk of ineffective firefighting w ill be increased. However, it will be necessary in some ships to make some adjustments to the numbers, and under these circumstances it is important that the overall concept of the organisation is retained. OOD Duty PO Roving if not RF emergencyControl Party 1 JR Main Group icSpecialist Personnel WE Specialist Party Duty WESR icME Specialist Party Duty MESR ic Switchboard operatorDuty MEMLDuty Vent ratingGangway Staff QM and BMCommunications Duty OMC Containment Party LWEMLOM 6 JRs Keys Duty SABA Party SRLH ic 2 JRs Attack Party MEM ic 3 JRsSupport Party 4 JRs BA Controller 1 JR Fig 20-1. Full Harbour Fire and Emergency Party Notes 1. When wearing BA, men with beards experien ce up to 10 per cent reduction in the wear time due to the reduced efficiency of the face seal. Men with beards should not, wherever practicable, in peacetime, be allocated to duties which require them to we ar breathing apparatus. In war time all beards are removed as part of the preparations for war. 2. The HFEP is to include a First Aid qualified rating non-RF and not a Main Group member. 2006. Ship knowledge, teamwork, speed and effectiv e use of firefighting techniques, and well maintained equipment are essential for successful firefighting. To further enhance theeffectiveness of the HFEP the following actions are recommendedUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-5 Change 2a. At the forenoon muster of the HFEP, on taking over the duty, personnel are to be detailed for their specific firefighting duties and all junior ratings are to be fully briefedon their individual tasks and responsibilities by group leaders. It is too late once an emergency has arisen, to attend to these arrangements. b. Daily Orders should include the names of all members of the HFEP and specify their individual roles within the organisation. 2007. First Aid Firefighters These personnel are not necessarily duty or sp ecifically detailed personnel. They are the persons discovering the fire and those in the vicinity who hear and respond to the loud vocal alarm of FIRE FIRE FIRE. It is most important that when a fire is discovered the alarm is alsoraised by informing the Quartermaster or HQ1SCC. First aid firefighters must use equipmentto hand in an attempt to extinguish or contain the fire. If unsuccessful in their attempt, the personwho found the fire and who has vital information about the location, seat and type of fire etc, must remain at the scene of the incident SOTI and report to the person in charge of the AttackParty and of the Main Group as they arrive to take charge of the incident. The OOD and Officer in Charge of the Local Authority Fire Brigade LAFB may also require to debrief the person whofound the fire. The name of the person finding the fire is to be reported to HQ1 by the IC Main Group and the person is to be escorted to HQ1 fo r debrief as soon as he can be spared or when ordered by the OOD. 2008. Main Group The precise function of the Main Group ma y alter, depending upon the situation and nature of the fire, but the basic philosophy rema ins the same - the Attack Party must always be prepared to attack a fire immediately it is reported and the remainde r of the group then maintains this attack continuously and aggressively . The IC Main Group is identified by wearing a red surcoat with a white stripe. 2009. IC Main Group a. The IC Main Group should 1 Have a thorough knowledge of the ships layout, which includes all routes of entry and exit from major compartments and those fitted with fixed firefightinginstallations. 2 Have a thorough knowledge of the harbour fire organisation contained in this Chapter and be familiar with a Chapter 16 and 21.b Ships General Orders, Indi vidual ships may differ as to Chapter 15 where the details of their fire- fighting orders and instructions c Ships NBCD Orders are laid down. d Harbour Fire Exercise Assessment Fo rm paying particular attention to Umpire 1 section.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-6 UK RESTRICTEDb. On taking up the duty he is to brief the Main Group to ensure that they are aware of their tasks and responsibilities within the fire and emergency organisation. c. On hearing the alarm he should proceed immediately to a safe position as close as possible to the scene of the inci dent, in order to appraise th e situation and to ensure that an effective initial attack is being made on the fire. With this first hand knowledge, and after debriefing the person who found the fire, he will be able to decide where to position himself and where to establish, after consu ltation with the DWESR, the smoke boundary. d. He must operate the fixed firefighting sy stems, when ordered by HQ1, and confirm their operation to HQ1. e. He must also bear in mind that the attack BA personnel 1 Should be dressed in overallsNo 4 wo rking dress with sleeves rolled down. 2 Should carry out a BA face seal check before entering the fire zone. 3 Will not necessarily be relieved by the firefighting team provided by the Support Party as they may have either put the fire out, r un out of air or been beaten back by the fire. 4 Will have been nominated at the Duty Watch muster so that the BA Controllers boards can be made up in advance. In making up the boards it is to be assumed that the pressure in each BA is 160 bar EDBA, and the time started to breath is taken as time the incident was piped. 5 May be compelled, for any of a vari ety of reasons, to withdraw from their attack on the fire. Should this happen th ey must ensure that the compartment is sealed by shutting the hatch or door. Consid eration may also be given to holding the hatch or door on a waterwall. In deciding which of these methods should be adopted consideration must be given to the problem of free surface water which can build upshould the sealing hose be in prolonged us e, compared to the flash over dangers involved in a full hatch door re-entry procedure. f. The IC Main Group must ascertain if th ere are any personnel trapped in the fire zone and if there are any casualties who require assistance. g. On the withdrawal of the Attack BA personnel, the IC Main Group must ensure that the expended firefighting appliances ar e moved out of the area from which the next attack is to be mounted. h. He must request, from HQ1, information on any specific hazards existing in the compartment on fire or in adjacent compartments. This information is included oncompartment firefighting Kill Cards, which are held at HQ1. i. He must supervise hose running, detailing the lengths of hoses required and the type of nozzles to be used, and should be guided by the following principlesUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-7 Change 21 Firefighting hoses must be run from se parate hydrants, although it is acceptable to use a Y piece to supply a boundary coo ling hose and a firefighting hose from the same hydrant. 2 Sufficient hose must be provided to allow the firefighters to reach all parts of the compartment. 3 The firefighter nozzle has a considerably lower discharge rate than the waterwall nozzle and is therefore the preferred nozzle for firefighting betweendecks. 4 Waterwall nozzles must always be used to provide the waterwall, and the firefighter nozzle is used for fighting carbonaceous fires. j. He must establish the nature of the fire and if there is a possibility that it is a fueloil fire, must ensure 1 The firefighting medium is AFFF.2 An FB5X branchpipe is used, in c onjunction with an inline inductor where appropriate. 3 Sufficient quantities of replenishm ent AFFF are provided for the Support Party. A 20 litre drum la sts approximately sixty seconds when supplying an FB5X branchpipe through a No 2 hose. 4 The number of drums to adequately blanket a compartment is shown adjacent to the foam inlet tube. This number should not be exceeded. It must beremembered that the foam will not spread evenly throughout a compartment owing to obstructions such as machinery, lockers, consoles etc, or if the ship has a heel. 5 If hatch or door re-entry is to be made, a third hose incorporating an inline inductor and fitted with a FB5X foam maki ng branchpipe must be used to provide AFFF. Before the FB5X is directed at a fire it is essential that foam is beingproduced. k. If it has not been necessary to shut the door or hatch on the fire and the Attack BA personnel are continuing to fight it, then th e IC Main Group may reque st, either directly to where the Support party are dressing, or preferably through HQ1SCC, that the first two fully dressed Support Party members be called forward to the FCP. The IC at the FCP then has the flexibility to use them in pursuing an aggressive attack, ifcircumstances dictat e, or holding them to await the remainder of the Support Party if a full re-entry is to be made. The IC at the FCP is to make every effort to inform HQ1SCC andor the Support Party dressing area whether the first two dressed are required or not.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-8 UK RESTRICTEDl. If the Support party arrive as a team then the IC at the FCP must brief them on the nature, location and size of the fire, together with any other information available. Thiscan be taken from Kill Cards and should include positions of hazardous items such as gas bottles, batteries etc. This briefing should take place in a suitable clean air environment where the team need not use air from their sets. He must ensure that each team memberis conversant with his task within the team. m. The IC Main Group must ensure that all personnel not involved with a re-entry procedure are kept well clear of the door or ha tch to be used. He must ensure that all those remaining in this area are fully protect ed by fearnought suit and BA, and keep low to avoid any fireball. n. As soon as the Support Party has been depl oyed to fight the fire and if a second Support Party cannot be supplied from Emerg ency Clear Lower Deck personnel, the IC Main Group must ensure that the relieved Attack Party is bein g dressed and prepared to form a second Support Party to be ready fo r briefing well before the team tackling the fire is due out. o. He will debrief all firefighting teams on their exit from the fire zone.p. He must keep the control team informed on the current situation, especially when it is changing, for better or for worse. In the latter situation, requests for add itional manpower should be made early. q. The IC Main Group must continue to direct the Main Groups attack on the fire until he is sure that the Local Authority Fire Brigade LAFB which should arrive at the scene of the incident SOTI quickly in th e UK, and probably less quickly in some other parts of the world is ready in all respects to commence firefighting, and has been fullybriefed on taking over the firefighting task. He remains at the SOTI and 1 Liaises with the LAFB.2 Maintains control over RN personnel w ho are assisting the LAFB in carrying out other firefighting tasks. 3 Keeps the OOD informed of the current situation and so assist him in his overall ship sa fety function. 2010. Attack Party The Attack Party, under the leadership of an MEM, should consist of two OMs or equivalent and one other JR. Th ese are organised such that the MEM ic plus one attack the fire and other two are BA wearers. They, and the BA Controller, are to be dressed in basic firefighting rig No 4 working dress or cotton overalls, natural fibre so cks, DMS boots and red surcoats throughout the period of th eir duty. Their aim is to attack the fire as quickly as possible.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-9 Change 3a. On the alarm being raised the MEM plus one other junior rate are to attack the fire, collecting SPEAFFF and CO2 fire extinguishers en route. They should establish the seat and nature of the fire using the thermal imaging camera TIC if it has beendelivered by the nominated rating. b. The two persons detailed as BA wearers, on hearing the alarm, are to act independently of one another a nd everyone else on board. They are to collect a portable SPE AFFF and proceed to the nearest BA locker, don the BA plus firefighters hood and anti-flash gloves, conduct a face seal ch eck and remaining on air proceed to the SOTI and attack the fire, whether or not the Attack BA Controller is present. The BAset number tally should be left at the en trance to the SOTI to identify that the BA wearer is within. The men being relieved first aid attack firefighters who are notwearing BA must then withdraw see sub para d again the use of ELSA should beconsidered if personnel are showing signs of smoke inhalation or respiratory distress. c. The BA Controller is to obtain his own BA control board and enter on it the time of the fire broadcast as the time of entry of the Attack BA team. He may not see the AttackBA men prior to them making their entry and must assume their initial BA pressure asentered on the control board to be 160 bar E DBA. The BA Controller must search the access to the SOTI for BA tallies and repor t his findings to the IC SSEPMain Group. d. When relieved, or beaten back and their attack on the fire has to cease, the Attack Party is to join up as the second Support Part y and prepare for further firefighting. If none is available from Emergency Clear Lower Deck personnel. Notes1.Thermal Imaging Camera TIC. The prime use of the TIC is to locate the seat of the fire through smoke. It is also useful in search and rescue, identifying fuel leaks feeding a fire, locating firefighting equipm ent and spotting unexpected hazards in smoke- logged areas. Until the arrival and invol vement of the fearnought suitmen, the TIC is a valuable tool to the MEM of the Attack Party. Initially the TIC is to be given to the MEM ic of the Attack party by a member of the Containment Party. Subsequently, its use will be controlled by the IC Main Group. In most circumstances, where the TIC is needed, the user will be wearing BA. The user should be aware of the TIC limitations described in Chapter 23. 2.Large Compartments with More than One Access Point. There is a risk that when the alarm is raised, members of the Attack Party will proceed to differing access points and frustrate the aim of a coordinated attack. Provision is to be made in Ships Orders for a standard muster point for each major s pace, so that these become well known and can also be piped when the initial alarm is raised. Simplicity is vital, therefore choiceof port or starboard passage access to all compartments may be appropriate as standardoperational procedures. 3.Head and Hand Protection Attack Party BA wearers should wear firefighters hoods and anti-flash gloves. The non BA wearers are not required to do so. 2011. Support Party a. On the alarm being raised, the Support Pa rty is to muster, with all speed, at the designated FRPP. This party has two main tasksBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-10 UK RESTRICTED1 To provide personnel dresse d in full firefighting rig, see Chapter 26, with a BA Controller, to the scene of the incident as soon as possible. 2 To coordinate, collect and provide to the SOTI all necessary equipment to sustain a continuous attack on the fire hoses, nozzles, inline inductors, AFFF, etc. Manpower for the latter task is to be pr ovided from members of the retiring Attack Party, from supplementary personnel onboard when the alarm is raised, or from Emergency Clear Lower Deck. b. Support Party fearnought suit men are to be dressed in basic firefighting rig see Chapter 26 throughout the period of their duty. Surcoats are to be worn see Para 2028. The composition of the Support Party 4-man fi refighting team is detailed in Para 2141. c. To ensure a continuous and aggressive a ttack on a fire, the Support Party is to be deployed as follows 1 Alarm raised, initial attack made by Attack Party Attack BA.2 Support party muster at the designat ed FRPP BA Controller at the FCP. 3 The first two members of the ini tial Support Party are to don FFHBC and proceed to the FCP on air. They are not required to carry out the standard communications check, as this will delay their arrival at the FCP. If the helmets are functioning correctly, each team member will have communications with each-other and with the IC FCP who will have a hand-held radio pre-set to Channel 1. 4 Once the first two arrive at the FCP, the IC then has the flexibility to use them, if needed, to maintain a continuous and a ggressive attack or, if the door to the compartment has been shut, keep them there to prepare for a full re-entry whilst waiting for the remainder of the Support Party to arrive. 5 The remainder of the Support Party are to carry out a communications check before reporting to the IC FCP on air. The Team Leader of the Support Party is to switch from FF to TL mode before donning the helmet. 6 If no message or information is r eceived at the Support Party dressing area, with regard to the state of the doorhatch to the compartment on fire, then it is to be assumed that the doorhatch is open. 7 The second Support Party is to use Channel 2 on their FFHBC helmet radios, so that they do not interfere with communications at the SOTI. The IC at the FCP is to change to Channel 2 once the second Support Party have taken over at the SOTI. 2012. BA Controller When BA is used operationally a BA Controller must be detailed. a. The BA Controller must be well trained in the use of the apparatus and understand the important part he plays in the safety arrangements for the firefighters in the fire zone.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-11 Change 3b. He must always be in possession of a reliable timepi ece and a marker pen for the control board. c. He locates at the nominated FCP, on hearing the fire pipe. He must remain outside the fire zone, near to the smoke boundary, and must on no account be detailed for any other duties. d. He may act as the Controller for up to ten BA wearers two 5 man teams, ie in the harbour fire situation he controls both the Attack and Support Party. e. The duties of a EDBA BA Controller are as follows 1 Assist the wearer to don and adjust BA, and to carry out functional and face seal checks. Clip the set number tally to the control board. 2 Mark up the BA control board see Chapter 27.3 When used for search and rescue, ensure that the tail of the guide line is secured to an anchorage point at the incident entry point. 4 Keep a sharp listening watch for any signals from distress alarms.5 Ensure that the IC Main Group is kept informed of the time that a relief team should be committed to relieve the pr evious team time relief due in. 6 Inform the Officer in Charge of firefighting if a BA wearer has not emerged by the time due out. 7 Replace the set number tally back on the set when the wearer has completed the task. 2013. WE Specialist On the alarm being raised, the Duty WE Senior Rate is to close up in HQ1SCC. He is responsible for a. Ensuring firefighting teams have access to magazines in the vicinity of the fire.b. Advising the OOD on the following 1 Magazine and explosive safety.2 Movement of ammunition.3 Magazine firefighting arrangements, spray systems and fitted pumping arrangements. 4 Electronic and electrical equipment safety.5 Internal and external communications.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-12 UK RESTRICTEDc. Coordinate containment, liaising betw een the 2 IC of the Containment Party, specialist parties and the OOD, in order to establish prior ities for the containment task and to ensure that the duties listed in Para 2014 are effectively executed. 2014. Containment Party The containment Party, in harbour, s hould comprise the following personnel. a. WE Senior Rate OIC.b. LWEMLOM 2 IC.c. Normally 6 personnel, but see S ection 2 for Reduced and Minimum HFEP numbers d. Additional hands should be employed when available. 2015. When the alarm is raised, members of the Containment Party are to muster, as quickly as possible, as directed by the fire pipe, collecting their containment bags from the blue lockers. A rating is to be predesignate d to provide a TIC at the SOTI. The OIC should work closely with HQ1 and regularly update HQ1 on the status of cont ainment. In harbour, the 2 ICs primary role is to brief boundary coolers on where they are re quired to cool and hazards in the vicinity of where they are cooling, and to confirm that boundary cooling has been established where directed. He should also check on the well-being of personnel, particular ly on the upperdecks and rove regularly to ensure boundary cooling effort s are proving effective. Containment details should not be marked on incident boards until th ey are confirmed. Guidance on boundary cooling and the temperature monitoring system TMS is at Annex B to Chapter 21. 2016. All personnel involved in containment should receive a detailed brief on their roles and responsibilities when assigned to boundary cool a compartment. The use of diagrams and containment Kill Cards, particularly in high risk areas such as magazines, will help considerablyin ensuring boundary coolin g is effectively conducted. 2017. The Duty LWEMLOM The Duty LWEMLOM, as 2 IC of the Containment Party, is to be briefed by the Duty WESR on the location of all the adjacent compartments and to be made aware of thosecompartments presenting the greatest hazard, eg magazines, gas bottle stowages, fuels,flammables etc. He should constantly check the boundaries to ensure that his team has contained the incident and is to keep the OOD informed th rough direct liaison with the DWESR. He is to provide first hand guidance on the safety of el ectronic and elect rical equipment and personnel. Smoke control measures initiated by the Att ack Party become the responsibility of the Containment Party once it has closed up. He ma y initiate local smoke control measures, using ventilation, as directed by HQ1SCC, reporting b ack on their effectiveness and the location of smoke boundaries. He is to initiate action to remove or drain down free surface water. 2018. Keys Rating Normally the Duty SA, the Duty Keys Rating musters at containment control on the alarm being raised, and is respons ible for obtaining the keys to the duplicate keyboard from the OOD, and then providing to the ratings in char ge of both Main Group and Containment Party the necessary keys to enable firefighters to gain access to all compartments in the vicinity of the fire.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-13 Change 12019. ME Specialist Party This party is responsible for a. Maintaining the integrity of the ships electrical power supplies and safeguarding those to electrical services, if necessary by shedding load andor putting additionalgenerators on load. Where possible, normal and alternative power supplies to the HPSW pumps should be established and main tained during firefighting operations. b. Crash stopping ventilation if only operable from the switc hboard, or ensuring it has been stopped. Shutting upper deck vent fl aps on systems serving the compartment on fire, and subsequent opera tion of other vent syst ems for smoke clearance. c. Checking all HPSW pumps and starting additional pumps to maintain the HPSW system pressure. If necessary, this is to be achieved by shutting off sea water to non essential services. d. Isolating electrical power supplies in a nd around the area of the fire to minimise the danger to firefighters and equipments. e. Checking and safeguarding those systems essential to the firefighting effort saturated steam, HP air, etc and isolating those systems containing hazardous fluids fuel, lub oil, hydraulics, etc to prevent them from feeding the fire. f. Making contact and liaising with the shore electrical supply authority. g. Advising the OOD on fixed firefighting installations for machinery spaces, paint shop, flammable store rooms, gas bottle stowages, hangars, etc. h. Advising the OOD on the following 1 The technical asp ects of firefighting. 2 Pumping and salvage arrangements.3 Ventilation and smoke clearance.4 Ship stability.5 The presence of compressed gases or pressu re vessels in the vicinity of the fire, including HP air, refrigerant gases, oxygen and acetylene gases, beer kegs andassociated CO 2 bottles. The discharging of the contents of HP air bottles, where possible. 6 The nature of the ships structure, ie aluminium or steel on the area of the fire.Note. In the Full HFEP organisation, all ships should employ a Duty ME Senior Rate and a separate qualified Switchboard Operator.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-14 UK RESTRICTED2020. Breathing Apparatus Party The Breathing Apparatus Party is led by th e BA Coordinator who must be specifically trained in this task. All members of this party must be familiar with BA control as well asrecharging techniques. On the alarm being ra ised the BA Coordinator organises his party to collect BA and spare cylinders e xcluding the 4 designated for th e upper deck re-entry locker to form a dump in a position allowing room to wo rk and being free from smoke. This location is to be broadcast. Once the necessary BA has b een collected, the BA Coordinator is responsible for a. The BA Tote Board. This provides a method of accounting for all BA and associated equipment and shows the quantity, identity number and location of all BA setsand spare bottles held onboard. b. Provision of BA to required user locations.c. Recharging used BA cylinders.d. Informing the OOD of the BA availability state.e. Coordinating optimum use of BA procured from outside sources other ships etc.f. Briefing all BA Controllers in their duties at the start of their period of duty, noting that BA Controllers in the Main Gr oup are not members of the BA party. g. Provision and briefing of BA Controllers, other than BA Contro llers pre-designated as members of the Main Groups. 2021. Breathing Apparatus Dump a.Forming The Dump. The location of the BA dump should take into consideration 1 Location of the fire.2 Proximity to the Flight Deck flying ops, weapons, sensors and areas where guard rails have been struck. 3 Access to charging facilities.4 Weather conditions rain, etc.5 Location of gangways and potential Local Authority Fire Brigade BA Dump Forward Control Point. 6 Availability of communications with HQ1SCCOOD.Note. If, after the initial location of the BA dump has been piped, the BA Coordinator considers that a move to another, more suitable, location isappropriate he should inform HQ1OOD and re-locate the dump.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-15 Change 3b.Setting Up The Dump 1 In forming the dump, all BA and associated equipment must be collected where possible. 2 The collection of BA and associated equipment should start in areas adjacent to the scene of the fire to minimise po ssible loss of equipment should the fire escalate. 3 When sets are collected from lockers all associated items should be removed and taken to the dump, ie control boards, board mark ers, hoods and gloves, etc. 4 As BA and other items arrive at th e dump they should be placed in separate areas as designated by the BA Coordinator, ie useable sets, spare bottles full, sparebottles empty, extension sets. 5 All sets should be checked on arriva l at the dump to ensure that they a Are not defective.b Are fully charged.c Have all straps fully extended.d Are recorded, along with all associated items on the Tote Board. 2022. Gangway Staff On receipt of the fire alarm, from whatever source, a pipe is to be made by the Gangway Staff or HQ1SCC Watchkeeper, as appropriate, informing the Ships Company of the existenceof a fire, its location and where various members of the Fire and Emergency Party are to muster. This pipe is to be repeated. When available, the main broadcast alarm is to be used prior to making this initial emergency broadcast. Thereafter, the Gangway Staff or the HQ1 Watchkeeperdepending on access to shore telephone are to carry out the following a. Inform the Local Authority Fire Brigad e LAFB, and maintain a 7.5 m clear area at the foot of the brow for LAFB access. b. Inform shore authorities.c. Inform adjacent ships.d. If the LAFB has arrived, then once the a ppropriate route to the SOTI from the on brow has been agreed between the officer responsible for ship safety and the LAFB officer, the BM can be instru cted to leave the gangway to identify the route by running a combined guide and sound powered telephone line. e. Control entry to and exit from the ship, and account for personnel using the peg board.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-16 UK RESTRICTEDf. Prepare to meet the LAFB Offi cers and escort them to HQ1OOD. g. Keep a red flag in daytime, or a red light at night at the foot on the on brow. 2023. Communications Rating On the alarm being raised, a Duty OMC is to carry out the following tasks a. Rig a sound powered telephone between HQ1 or other control position and the FCP. b. Man emergency communications nets to outside authorities.Notes 1. Task a. above should be undertaken by the HQ1 Incident Board Operator Communications Number when in the Re duced Harbour Fire Party organisation. 2. Task b. is only to be undertaken when the Full Harbour Fire Party organisation is in force and there are two duty OMCs in the Duty Watch. 2024. Control Party On the alarm being raised, the Control Rating is to close up in HQ1 or another suitable position with adequate communications should it not be possible to occupy HQ1 and man the incident board and internal communication lines. He is to make a chronological record of events during the incident. The OOD, also in HQ1, must not become too involved in the details which are the responsibility of the ratings in charge of the various groups and parties, but he must consider the following a. The possible hazards from ex plosives and flammables. b. The availability of equipment, power supplies, fire and salvage pumps. c. The hazards of smoke and smoke clearance see Chapter 21.d. Safety of personnel, including any civilians, who may be onboard. e. Ship stability.f. Control and allocation of additional manpower. g. Liaison with adjacent ships and outside authorities. 2025. Medical First Aid A certificated first aider, qualified to Leve l 2, is to be included in the Harbour Duty Watch. He is not to be part of the Reaction Fo rce or Main Group. The role of the Duty First Aider DFA and the response expected from a Ships Company when dealing with a fire involving casualties is as followsUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-17 Change 2a. Ships with reduced manningharbour duty watches may use the DFA to deliver the TIC or keys to the IC at the SOTI but he must be relieved of those responsibilities to deal with any immediate casualties. If there are no immediate casualties he is to closeup at HQ1, with adequate equipment, draw the keys to the Sickbay and prepare for casualties. This allows direct co mmunication between SOTIOODHQ1SCC. b. On assuming the duty, the DFA is to draw a specific first aid bag from the Medical Branch Rating or previous DFA, be re -briefed and perform equipment checks on Entonox and oxygen. c. A loud vocal alarm on finding a fire should include the presence of casualties. Priorities for attacking the fire should not change, although casualties should be moved if hindering firefighting efforts. On be ing beaten back, the casualty should then be rescued by the retreating fire fighters or as directed by the OOD or IC at the SOTI. d. The casualty is to be moved to clear air, beyond the smoke boundary and clear of any traffic, and passed into the care of the DFA who should receive the following information about the casualty 1 Nature of injuries, if known.2 Whether or not exposed to inhala tion of smoke, any loss of consciousness. 3 Whether or not a key member of the firefighting organisation. 4 Locationcompartment rescued from, and whether or not any other casualties exist, so that search and rescue is not implemented unnecessarily. e. All information is to be passed immediat ely to the OODHQ1. The DFA is then to liaise with the QM and await arriva l of professional medical assistance. f. The DFA must be afforded assistance when dealing with isolated injured personnel. g. On completion of the duty, the DFA is to return the first aid bag and debrief the Medical Branch Ratingincoming DFA as required. 2026. Emergencies As soon as it is apparent that a fire is more than a minor incident, the OOD should declare a full scale emergency as detailed in Section 2 of Chapter 7. This will ensure that alluninvolved personnel are brought out of the ship, clear of danger, and provides a ready pool of spare hands for extra firefi ghting and containment tasks. 2027. Spare.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-18 UK RESTRICTED2028. Identification of FF Personnel In order to facilitate the easy recogniti on of Fire and Emergency Party personnel, coloured surcoats should be worn as follows a. Red, with a white stripe IC Main Group.b. Red Main Group with the exception of the BA Controller. c. Yellow Breathing Apparatus Party plus Attack and Support Parties BA Controllers. d. Green Duty Vent. e. Blue Containment Party. f. Brown Nominated Key Personnel. 2029 Firefighters Communications The Support Party are equipped with the Firefighters Helmet with Built-in Communications FFHBC to enable them to co mmunicate with the IC Main Group. The helmet is described in Chapter 26 and the radi o procedures are detailed in Chapter 9. 2030 -2031. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-19 Change 2SECTION 2 - REDUCED AND MINIMUM HARBOUR FIRE AND EMERGENCY PARTY ORGANISATIONS 2032. It is mandatory to maintain a harbour Duty Watch roster of not less than 1 in 4 in HM Naval Bases outside of leave pe riods. Whilst some ships are able to achieve this without undue problems, others particularly Type 23s have difficulty. Ther efore, the composition of Harbour Fire and Emergency Parties HFE P may be reviewed in order to provide Commanding Officers with greater flexibility in manpower manage ment. The following paragraphs provide Commanding Officers with guidance on the opti ons of HFEP size re quired and mandates the minimum organisation which can be operated, in specific circumstan ces, in Fleet Time. It does not include the arrangements for a. Ships in Upkeep.b. Ships outside HM Naval Bases, which s hould maintain a Full HFEP. Lean-manned ships which are unable to achieve this level may reduce towards the Reduced HFEPorganisation at Para 2035 and Fig 20-2, taki ng into account the associated risk. 2033. Risk Commanding Officers retain Ca re and Protection of their personnel in all circumstances and a prime role of the Duty Watch is to safe guard those personnel living on board. In HM Naval Bases, where a degree of support can be guarant eed, there is potential to reduce the numbers of HFEP personnel commensurate with the level of potential support and the degree of risk of a major fireflood occurring. The decision regard ing the size of HFEP required should only be made after careful assessment of the relevant risks, balanced against the need to maintain 1 in 4or better alongside in support of Personal Functional St andards. Fleet Waterfront Staff should be consulted before reduc ing to the Minimum HFEP. 2034. Risk assessment involves severa l areas, most particularly th e management of fires and other such emergencies. The following key areas will require evaluation before deciding on thelevel of HFEP to be employed a.Level of Experience. Ships that have not achieved a formally recognised level of training in the past year Satisfactory or better assessment in OST would normallyneed to operate a full Duty Watch althoug h, in the intervening periods and after additional training if a Satisfactory a ssessment was not achieve d at OST assessment can be conducted by Fleet Waterfront Staff. Commanding Officers will need to pay close attention to the impact of the turnove r of large numbers of personnel, or key personnel such as OODs, on sta ndards previously achieved. b.Prior Training. Ships planning to change from one size of HFEP to another should ensure that all Duty Watches are fully brie fed and exercised prior to undertaking a duty in the new organisation.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-20 UK RESTRICTEDc.Local Authority Fire Brigade LAFB. The L AFB serving HM Naval Bases Portsmouth and Devonport can be expected to arrive in about 5 minutes. However, Commanding Officers should be aware that a further significant period of time perhaps 10-15 minutes may elapse before LAFB firefighters are able to commence tackling thefire. Industrial action by LAFB either act ual or forecast woul d normally preclude use of the Minimum HFEP. d.Ships Status. Is the ship fuelledammunitionedstored? What machinery and electrical equipment is operatin g? What nature of work is being undertaken onboard? The amount of burningwelding taking place during an AMP significantly increases the risk of fire. Commanding Officers may wish to consider utilising a larger Duty Watchduring the day until such work has completed and then revert to a smaller HFEP, notingthat thorough re-briefing of personnel would be required at the transition. An enhanced rounds routine could also be considered. e.Mutual Support from Other Units. When a ship is berthed in close proximity to other RN warships it can norma lly be assumed that adjacent ships will be able to provide additional manpower and equipmen t, should an emergency occur. However, if they too are working a Minimum HFEP the numbers of personnel they will be able to provide will be significantly reduced. Ships should also consider what support they themselves can safely provide to an adjacent ship if it re quests assistance to deal with an emergency. f.Age of Ship. Older ships do not have the benefit of modern integrated fire detection systems. However, the same ships also te nd to have larger num bers of personnel from which to draw the HFEP. g.Security State. The Duty Watch will need to be enhanced when the security state dictates. h.Risk Assessment. Commanding Officers considering reducing to the Minimum HFEP will need to balance the above factors against their manpower constraints and their knowledge of the experience and competence of their personnel. In some situations it may be necessary to review the composition of certain duty rosters to ensure that therequired experience and competence is availa ble. Squadron advice should be taken into account.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-21 Change 22035. Reduced HFEP OOD Duty PO Roving if not RF emergency Control Party 1 JR Main Group ic Specialist Personnel WE Specialist Party Duty WESR icME Specialist Party Duty MESR ic Switchboard operatorDuty MEMLOn watch Aux MEMGangway Staff QM and BM Containment Party LOM 3 JRs Keys Duty SABA Party SRLH ic Attack Party MEM ic 3 JRs Support Party 4 JRs BA Controller 1 JR Fig 20-2. Reduced Harbour Fire and Emergency Party 2036. The Reduced HFEP, shown in Fig 20-2, includes of the following personnel a. The Main Group should be under the overa ll charge of the IC Main Group who must have a good knowledge of the ship and firefighting techniques. b. The Attack Party, under the leadership of an MEM, should contain one WEM and one Operations Department junior rating or two OMs and one other JR. c. The four members of the Support Party ar e to dress in Full Firefighting Rig before reporting to the IC Main Group. The Attack pa rty BA Controller is to act as Controller for all members of the Main Group. d. Attack and Support Partie s share the BA Controller. e. In addition to taking charge of the C ontainment Party, the LOM should also provide a guidance on electronic and electrical safety. f. The Containment Party s hould contain all other duty personnel who have not been detailed for other specific fire and emergency party tasks, plus all available non-specified Duty Watch and non-duty personnel.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-22 UK RESTRICTEDg. The On-Watch Bosuns Mate is to act as one of the members of the Containment Party, after running out the guideline from the gangway to the FCP. This can only be carried out if he is not carrying a weapon. h. The duty SA is to act as a member of the containment group once he has obtained keys for all the compartments in the fire area. i. Provided he is suitably qualif ied, the duty ME Senior Rate may, in ships where the main switchboard and HQ1 are co-located, also undertake the duties of the Switchboard Operator. j. All non-specified Duty Watch and non- duty personnel are available for use. 2037. Minimum HFEP OOD Duty PO Control Party Main Group ic Specialist Personnel WE Specialist Party Duty WESR icME Specialist Party Duty MESR ic Off Watch MEMGangway Staff QM BM Containment Party LOM 3 JRs Attack Party On Watch MEM ic 3 JRsBA Controller Fig 20-3. Minimum Harbour Fire and Emergency Party 2038. The Minimum HFEP, shown in Fig 20-3, consists of the following personnel a.Officer of the Day OOD. The experience and competence of the OOD will be pivotal to the Minimum HFEPs ability to deal with a significant incident such as a firewhich is not extinguished by the Attack Pa rty. The OOD will need to have a complete understanding of the tasks being undertaken by the various personnel and will need to direct them positively and with forethought. In particular the OOD will need to control the transition of the HFEP from an immediate r eaction posture to the core of a larger team concerned with combatting a more serious incident.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-23 Change 2b.Duty Petty Officer DPO. The DPOs initial response to an alarm is to obtain first hand information from the Scene of the Inci dent SOTI and surrounding compartments in order to provide a verbal brief to the OOD in HQ1 of the situation. The brief should include, but is not limited to, details of the fireflood, th e compartments affected, the extent of smoke within the ship, the positi ons of the IC Main Group and Attack Party, casualties and any perceived problems. If possible, the DPO should give the OOD an indication of whether he considers that the Attack Party will be able to deal with theemergency. On completion of the brief, the DPO should act as directed by the OOD, either repeating the tour of the affected area to provide a further brief to the OOD, or establishing the progress with the muster ing of non-duty personnel. If available information indicates that the fire is not within the capabilities of the Attack Party, theOOD should direct the DPO to switch role to BA Coordinator in preparation for controlled attack on the fire utilising non- duty personnel, personnel from adjacent ships or the LAFB. c.Control Party. The Control Party will be the on-watch HQ1 Watchkeeper. On the alarm being raised he is to make the standard pipe and then immediately pipeEmergency Clear Lower Deck. Either the HQ1 Watchkeeper or the QM is to inform adjacent ships and call the LAFB in accordance w ith the ships standard procedures. The HQ1 Watchkeeper then mans the incide nt board and internal communications. d.On-Watch Quartermaster QM. The QMs initial reactions are as laid down in Para 2022. In addition, the QM should ensu re that a senior person from the non-duty personnel is mustering them. Presuming th e non-duty personnel are adjacent to the brow or on the jetty, the QM should act as the co mmunications link to and from the OOD. The QM should also ensure that the second brow is opened, u tilising one of the non-duty personnel or if none are onboard then one from an adjacent ship if possible. e.On-Watch Boatswains Mate BM. The BM should immediately take the Thermal Imaging Camera TIC which is to be held adjacent to the brow to the SOTIthen provide the communications from HQ1 to the SOTI. He is then to return to thebrow to await the arrival of the LAFB and lead the LAFB Senior Officer to HQ1. Oncethe route to the Forward Control Point FCP from the on brow has been agreed the BM is to run the combined guide and telephone line. On completion he is to return to the brow but may be required to form the core of the BA Party under the leadership of the DPO if the fire has not been extinguished by the Attack Party. He will need to be trainedin BA re-charging. f.Duty ME Senior Rate DMESR. The DMESR must be Switchboard Operating Certificate SOC qualified. He is to direct the off-watch MEM and is to undertake the function at Para 2019. g.On-Watch MEM. Immediately the alarm is raised the on-watch MEM is to assume the role of IC of the Attack Party. h.Off-Watch MEM. The off-watch MEM is to muster in HQ1 for tasking by the DMESR, primarily to carry out ME isolations and vent duties.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-24 UK RESTRICTEDi.Duty WE Senior Rate DWESR. After his initial briefing to the OOD on the WE aspects, the DWESR is to act as the Containment Coordinator in accordance withPara 2013. j.Containment Party. The Initial Containment Party will comprise the duty LOM plus the off-watch QM, BM and HQ1 Watchkeeper. Their duties are as laid down inPara 2014 excluding provision of the TIC to the SOTI. In addition the LOM is to act asthe Keys Rating, noting that the priority compartments will always be those adjacent to the scene of the fire rather than the lockedclosed compartment containing the fire whichwould require a full controlled re-entry in slower time. The LOM is to liaise with theContainment Coordinator ensuri ng that he has a full picture of the extent of the firesmoke and requirements for additional personnel. Th e Containment Party may be supplemented later by the on-watch BM, by non-duty personnel, personnel from other ships or re-deployed Attack Party personnel. k.IC Main Group. When a Minimum HFEP is being used the IC Main Group must ensure that he provides the OOD with the earlie st possible assessment of the scale of the emergency supplementing the information later as necessary. The OOD must be informed early whether the door to the compar tment is openshut. He must ensure his plan for dealing with the emergency takes account of the availab ility of manpower. In particular, the availability of personnel to form a Support Pa rty will influence whether the door to the compartment will need to be closed on withdrawal of the Attack BA or whether the IC Main Group consider calling forward individual members of a forming Support Party to relieve the Attack BA. l.Attack Party. The Attack Party will be formed by the on-watch MEM plus 3 other junior ratings. The Attack Party duties ar e as laid down in para 2010 except that when relievedbeaten back they ar e immediately to work as directed by the IC Main Group to prepare the necessary equipment for a Support Pa rtyLAFB attack on the fire or to be re- deployed for containment effort . Information obtained by use of the TIC must be passed to the IC Main Group to assist in pla nning the next attack and for optimising containment effort in the interim. m.BA Controller. Duties are in accordance with Para 2012. 2039. No dedicated First Aid Party is available in this organisation. Ships should ensure that one non-Main Group member of the HFEP is suita bly trained or that adequate cover can be provided by an adjacent ship. 2040. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-25 Change 1SECTION 3 - HARBOUR FIRE AND EMERGENCY PARTY IN MMPP 2041. HFEP Manning MMPPs have significantly fe wer personnel than DDFFs, but they have sufficient people to form a competent and effective HFEP to successfully tackle a harbour emergency until assistance arrives. There are two le vels of HFEP in operational MMPP a.Full HFEP Team of 8 OOD IC Gangway Position DSR IC at Scene of IncidentBA Controller DLH Attack BA DTECH Technical dutiesprovide OOD with technical advice QM Longest off watch First Aid Attack QM Off watch First Aid Attack QM On watch Flag, inform other ships and Emergency Services and Incident Board Marker SS Attack BA, IC keys and First Aider b.Reduced HFEP Team of 7 OOD IC Gangway position and Incident Board DSR IC at Scene of IncidentBA Controller DTECH Technical dutiesprovide OOD with technical advice QM Off watch First Aid Attack QM Off watch First Aid Attack QM On watch Initial duties flag, inform other ships and Emergency Services then Attack BA SS Attack BA, IC keys and First Aider 2042. Outside of Naval Bases, all MMPPs are to maintain a minimum number of eight personnel in their HFEP. When berthed in Naval Bases, this may be rela xed to seven if a 14 roster cannot be maintained, k eeping Squadron Commanders informe d. This relaxation is not to apply to ships undergoing OST where the SPO or ganisation is implemented. The guidance in FLAGOs regarding the sharing of some elements of the Duty Watch between two similar ships berthed alongside on another, or in adjacent berths, may still be followed. Approval is not required, but Squadron Commanders shoul d be kept informed of the intent to follow this routine. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-26 UK RESTRICTEDOOD Duty Tech Duty SR Gangway Staff QM 2 First Aid Firefighters 2 Attack BA Fig 20-4. HFEP Structure in MMPPs 2043. Gangway Staff On receipt of the fire alarm, from whatever source, a pipe is to be made by the gangway staff or SCC if manned informing the Ships Company of the existence of a fire and its location.The pipe is to be repeated. The main broadcas t General Alarm should be used prior to the making the initial Fire broadcast. Thereafter the gangway staff are to carry out the following tasks a. Inform the LAFB and other shore aut horities iaw local instruction, ie 2222999. b. Inform adjacent ships Telephone numbers to be recorded in Gangway Log. c. Position a red flag in daytime, or red light a night at the foot of the on brow.d. Control entry to and exit from the ship.e. Switch on the portable communications and ensure the correct pre-designated channel is selected. f. Commence marking-up the emergency on the NBCD Incident Board.g. Break out the Kill Card log identify relevant cards. 2044. Officer of the Day On the alarm being raised, the OOD is to cl ose up at the gangway and establish HQ1 at the QMs harbour position. a. The OOD must not become too involved in the details of fighting the fire, but must have an accurate and clear picture of the incident, which will a llow him to properly assess the situation and therefore de ploy his limited resources accordingly. b. As soon as it becomes apparent that a fi re is more than a minor incident, the OOD should not hesitate to declare a full scale emergency and order an Emergency Clear Lower Deck. This will ensure that all non-duty personnel and visitors are brought out of the ship and clear of danger. It w ill also provide a read y pool of ma npower for additional firefighting and containment tasks.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-27 Change 32045. First Aid Firefighters A minimum of two hands must be detailed as first aid attack firefighters. On hearing the emergency broadcast they should a. Pick up the nearest SPEAFFF and proceed directly to the SOTI, additional extinguishers can be collected on the way to the SOTI, including either dry powder or CO2 extinguishers if appropriate. b. Before entering, re-acquaint themselves with the compartment orientation, location of specific hazards, and additional firefigh ting, lifesaving apparatus and alternative escape routes within the compartment by using the Kill Card diagram at the compartmentaccess. c. Relieve the persons who di scover the fire and direct them to withdraw from the compartment to de-brief the Duty Senior Rating DSR. The use of ELSA should be considered when personnel are showing the signs of smoke inhalation or respiratory distress. d. Commence a continuous and a ggressive attack on the fire using their SPE, whilst assessing the situation in preparation for briefi ng the DSR, eg size and type of fire, likely sourcecause, etc. The priority is to maintain the initial aggressive attack on the fire,however, efforts must be made to brief the DSR so that the correct preparations can be made to support the initial efforts. Notes1. The provision of additional SPEAFFF will ensure that a continuous and aggressive attack may be maintained on the fire and will additionally equip the attackBA firefighters when they arrive to fight the fire. 2. All initial firefighting efforts must be made using SPEs. The use of lay-flat hoses and firefighter nozzles could a. Result in personal injury from electric shocks power isolations are unlikely to have been completed. b. Divert efforts, while the hoses are run out and charged, from maintaining the initial, aggressive attack on the fire. c. Foul SOTI access and hinder personne l evacuating or closing down the compartment should the fire escalate out of control. d. Pump unwanted water into the ship causing a free surface problem in addition to the fire. 3. The transfer from shore supply to ships generators may require the use of dead- board routines. This will cause the moment ary loss of supplies to fire pumps and could jeopardise the safety of pe rsonnel if lay-flat hoses are used during the initial aggressive attack on the fire.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-28 UK RESTRICTED2046. Attack BA Firefighters A minimum of two hands must be detailed as Attack BA firefighters. On hearing the alarm they act independently of one another and everyone else on board. They are to collect a SPEAFFF and proceed to the nearest BA locker, don the BA, firefighters hood and anti-flashgloves, conduct a face seal check and remaining on ai r, proceed to the SOTI and attack the fire, whether or not the DSR Attack BA Controller is present. Th e BA set number tally should be left at the access to the SOTI to identify that the BA wearer is within. The men being relievedFirst Aid Firefighters who are not wearing BA must then withdraw again the use of ELSA should be considered if personne l are showing the signs of sm oke inhalation or respiratory distress. Note. There is no provision in the HFEP for a Support fearnought Party to relieve the Attack BA firefighters. If the initiative to fight the fire is lost, either because the firefighters run out ofSPE or the fire escalates out of control, th e firefighters should evacuate and the compartment should be closed down and contained until a full re -entry, using a fully dr ess and briefed re-entry team can be made. 2047. Duty Senior Rating DSR a. On hearing the emergency broadcast, the DSR has two immediate responsibilities 1 Record the time of the initial FIRE pipe, to enable completion of the Attack BA control board. 2 Ensure the portable communications is switched on and the correct channel pre-designated is selected. b. The DSR should then proceed to a safe position immediately adjacent to the SOTI and establish an FCP, picking up an additional SPE en route. The Attack BA firefighters act independently of all other personnel and proceed to attack the fire whether or not the BA Controller is present. The BA Controller may not see the attack BA men prior tothem making their entry to the SOTI and assumes 1 Initial BA pressure, entered in column B on the BA EDBA control board to be 160 bar. 2 The Time started to breathe as entered in column C to be the time of the initial Fire pipe. 3 EDBA control tallies found adjacent to the SOTI access indicate that BA wearers have already entered the SOTI. c. The responsibilities as detaile d above can be competently and be safely undertaken by the DSR. However, this interpretation of guidance must only be used for the first onair, entry made by the nominated attack BA firefighters into the SOTI. He should have the partially marked-up 2-man Attack BA control board marked with nominated names,altogether with a chinagraph pencil with him at all times see Chapter 27 for details ofthe 2-man Attack BA control board.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-29 Change 1Notes 1. Should either or both BA wearers withdr aw from the SOTI and remove their mask or breach the face seal, they are forbidden to proceed back into the SOTI unless another BA Controller is nominated and normal BA control procedures applied. 2. The Duty Senior Rating DSR must not en ter the Scene of the Incident SOTI or become too involved in actual firefighting. He must maintain a safe Forward Control Point FCP and control access of manpower and material resources into the SOTI,compile his BA control board and monitor the endurance of the Attack BA firefightersand make regular reports to the OOD. 2048. Duty Technical Rating The Duty Technical Rating is to be fully conversant with the operation of ME, L and basic WE equipment. On hearing the emergency broadcast he is to proceed to the SCCMCR andcarry out the following tasks a. Crash-stop ventilation by opening all ventilation breakers at the switchboard or SCCMCR central crash-stop panel. After a pause for five seconds reclose the breakers to restore the electri cal supply to local fa n starters, see Note. Note. Hunt Class MMs have in-line switche s fitted to 5 genera l ventilation fans and require these switches to be locally opened before their respective breakers are reclosed otherwise these fans will restart automatically. Therefore, in Hunt Class, the generalventilation breakers must not be reclosed until all 5, fan starters have been visuallysighted as open at the local position. b. Start the stand-by generator, transfer th e load from shore-side power and isolate the shore supply breaker. It may be necessary to conduct this operation via a dead-board routine which results in the loss of all lighting and supplies to fire pumps. Therefore, thetransfer to ships power must be quickly undertaken and every effort must be taken to minimise the disruption to the firefighting effort. c. Start additional fire pumps and positively confirm the pressure in the HPSW main.d. Implement referring to Kill Cards pr imary and secondary power isolations as ordered by the OOD. e. Additionally, he is to advise the OOD on 1 Fuel and HP air isolations required.2 Compartment fixed firefightingdrench systems to be opera ted or made ready. 3 Any pumpingsalvage arrangements to be considered.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-30 UK RESTRICTED2049. Duty First Aider DFA Due to the size of ships companies, MMPPs may find it difficult to include a dedicated first aider within the Harbour Duty Watch. Ho wever, it is possible for the responsibilities of a DFA to be undertaken as a secondary task by an appropriately qualified member of the HFEP. During emergencies, early consideration must be given to Emergency Clear Lower Deck of allpersonnel not involved in the incident. This will provide a ready pool of spare hands to release the DFA from his primary function to concentrate on casualty handling, or, to identify qualifiednon-duty personnel to assist with fi rst aid treatment. The role of the Duty First Aider DFA and the response expected from a sh ips company when dealing with casualties is as follows a.MMPPs in Base Naval Port. Medical support and cove r is provided from the Duty Medical Officer of the Guard Medical Guard. Nevertheless, a member of the HFEP isto be nominated DFA as a secondary task. Naval Base facilities, adjacent ships and non- duty personnel onboard the ship can be called upon to assist. The le vel of cover during working hours is to be increased by nominating the Duty Cook as the DFA. b.MMPPs Away from Base Naval Port. Consideration must be given to nominating a DFA from within the Duty Watch to provide 24 hour cover, restructuring as necessary to ensure the tasks expected of a DFA can be undertaken without detriment to the firefighting effort. c. On assuming the duty including if deta iled as a secondary task, the nominated rating is to draw a specific First Aid bag from the Coxswain or previous DFA, receivea brief and perform checks on Entonox and othe r first aid equipment. The first aid bag is to be readily available at all times and must be carried when closing up on hearing anemergency pipe. d. The DFA andor personnel evacua ting casualties are to ascertain 1 Nature of injuries.2 Possible inhalation of sm oke, any loss of consciousness. 3 Whether or not a key member of the firefighting organisation. 4 Locationcompartment rescued from.5 Whether other casualties were in the vi cinity, to avoid unnecessary search and rescue effort. e. All information is to be passed to the OOD on the gangway immediately. On completion, the DFA is to monitor the casua lties and await the arrival of professional medical assistance. f. The DFA must be given assistance to cope with injured personnel at isolated locations. The use of non-duty personnel should be considered. g. On completion of the period of duty, the DF A is to return the First Aid bag and brief the Coxswain, or oncoming DFA as required.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-31 Change 12050. Personnel Safety and Control In the event of the OOD ordering an Emergen cy Clear Lower Deck, it is important that every person onboard including civilian personne l where appropriate can be accounted for as quickly as possible. In the event of a fire onboard an MMPP whilst in harbour, the safest location to muster personnel is on the jetty. Th e ships gangway peg board, visitors book, ashore on duty log, T-card rack, etc, should all be us ed to positively account for personnel. The first member of the Ships Company over the brow once Emergency Clear Lower Deck is piped should be detailed by the gangway staff to coordinate the muster of personnel and report back to the OOD, until relieved by the Je tty Marshall an officer or se nior rating nominated by the OOD to coordinate resources, manpower and arriving emergency serv ices, ie LAFB, Medical Guard, Police, personnel from adjacent ships, etc on the jetty. 2051. Responsibilities of Non-Duty Personnel The HFEP in a MMPP can only provide an initia l aggressive attack on the fire. Should the incident escalate out of cont rol and require full containment a nd a re-entry, the assistance of non-duty personnel onboard at the time , together with the emergency services and adjacent ships will be vital in successfully dea ling with this major incident. If the OOD orders an Emergency Clear Lower Deck in response to an escalatin g fire, non-duty personnel should evacuate the ship by the quickest possible route, whilst keeping clear of the SOTI and its associated smokeboundaries. Personnel must not return to thei r messdeck to collect belongings, although whenever possible they should try to dress in su fficient clothing to pr event exposure and enable their employment in support of the emergency. Doors and hatches shoul d be closed behind them to reduce the spread of smoke. 2052. Equipment Requirements The following initial preparations are required to ensure that the HFEP are adequately prepared and supported to effectively deal with a major fire in harbour a. AHQ incident board includi ng portable illumination, K ill Card Log, full range of chinagraph pencils and portabl e communications to be immediately available at the QMs harbour gangway position. b. TIC to be readily available and accessible from the upper deck.c. A yellow surcoat, BA control board, and ch inagraph pencil to be available at the QMs harbour position. 2053. Once the OOD orders Emergency Clear Lowe r Deck the following equipment should be taken by evacuating non- duty personnel to the jetty a. A minimum of four sets of fearnought suits, gloves, firefighters hoods, boots and socks, these are usually stowed rolled together, in bundles, in the FRP locker. b. TIC to be collected and taken to the jetty.c. A minimum of four sets of BA.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-32 UK RESTRICTEDThis will enable spare hands to dress and equip a four-man fear nought suit team together with a BA Controller, who can either be briefed and deta iled to conduct a re-entry, or act as guides for a LAFB firefighting team. 2054. Jetty Space Whenever physical conditions permit, a clear space 7.5m radius should always be kept clear near the foot of the brow LAFB applia nces require a space 10.5m x 5m for parking and operation although certain special appliances may require a larger area. The area is to be conspicuously marked Fire Brigade - Keep Clea r, and gangway staffs should enforce no parking or waiting in that zone during an emergency. Care must be taken not to foul the immediate areaat the bottom of the gangway. The Jetty Marsha ll must ensure that spare hands and equipment dumps are to the side, and liaise with the arriving emergency services and adjacent ships teamsto prioritise space and access. Fig 20-5 shows th e structure and interaction between the groups during an emergency. 2055. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-33 Change 2BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-34 UK RESTRICTEDSECTION 4 - FIREFIGHTING IN CONJUNCTION WITH LOCAL AUTHORITY FIRE BRIGADES 2056. Liaison with Local Auth ority Fire Brigades LAFB A good liaison with LAFBs is esse ntial if efficient use is to be made of their service in the event of fire. This liaison is vital when a ship is in harbour for any le ngth of time andor the Ships Company is depleted eg by leave or training. a. All RN and RFA vessels are to contact the LAFB on arrival at a port away from their home base, either in the UK or abroad, to arra nge for a ship acquaint visit. The objective of this visit is for the LAFB Officers to familiarise themselves with the ships layout,firefighting practices, firefighting organisa tion and installed firefighting equipment. b. Exceptionally, for security reasons or assessed lack of capability in some foreign ports, the Commanding Officer may exercise hi s discretion in not ma king local contact. c. Contact with the LAFB in Portsmouth, Plymouth and Clyde Naval Bases should be made, in the first instance, through the Ministry of Defence Area Fire Prevention OfficerAFPO. The AFPO should be kept up-to-dat e with any significant changes that might affect the ships firefighting capability, eg docking, leave period, supply of additional pumps etc. d. The AFPO or one of his officers will a ttend ship fires during normal working hours, but this attendance may be delayed during silent hours. e. For ships in Upkeep Periods it is essential that the LAFB and AFPO are kept fully informed by the Commanding Officer or Se nior Naval Officer of the circumstances applicable to a ship. See Chapter 24. 2057. LAFB Priorities The firefighting priorities of the LAFB are as follows a. To save life.b. To save property.c. To extinguish the fire. 2058. LAFBDLCOOD Liaison Ships General Orders are to contain instructions for calling the LAFB as an automatic response to the discovery of a suspected or known fi re when a ship or submarine is berthed in a Naval Base, commercial port or shipyard. During exercises the LAFB emergency call is to be a touch drill only. At anchor or at a buoy, due regard must be given to the LAFB problem of getting out to the ship.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-35 Change 12059. Upon arrival of the LAFB the Senior Fire Offi cer attending the incident is to be met at the brow and escorted directly to the Ships Officer responsible for the safety of the ship. At this stage in Portsmouth, Plymouth and Faslane the LAFB may establish their own Control Point CP, Forward Control Point FCP, and Breathi ng Apparatus BA and firefighting equipment dump in the most appropriate lo cations. Should the LAFB subsequently become involved in the incident, communications are to be established between the Officer responsible for ship safety and the LAFB CP. Whenever possible a Liaison Officer or Senior Ratin g should be stationed at the LAFB CP. 2060. The Ships Officer responsible for the safety of the ship is to fully brief the Senior Fire Officer on the situation, and the n, after consultation with him, decide whether to ask the LAFB to standby or carry out firefighting actions. The Ships Officer responsible for the safety of the ship may request the LAFB to undertake some, or indeed all, aspects of the operation. The appropriate strategy will be dependent on the na ture of the incident and the ships manpower and equipment available. Any request for assistance should be clearly recorded. If LAFB assistance is accepted, control of the firefighting aspects of the incident is to be given to the Senior FireBrigade Officer. A main broadcast pipe advisi ng personnel that the LAFB are assuming control of firefighting is to be made. 2061. The level of involvement of th e LAFB will be determined by the operational state of the vessel and the ships complement. As a general rule, frigates a nd above that are operational may require less assistance than MMPP or submarines. Due to the limited manpower resources,RFAs and ships in refit or repair will generally require major assistance from the LAFB. Theinitial level of attendance is predetermined by individual local authorities and is usually in theorder of two appliances with others later. 2062. Ship Safety Notwithstanding the involvement of the LAFB in some or all aspects of the operation, the officer responsible for ship safety retains full overall responsibility and safety of the ship, but not the control of the LAFB personnel if they are comm itted to the firefighting task. It is imperative that no matter what firefighting strate gy is adopted, until such time that a fire is extinguished, a continuous attack on the fire is maintained. 2063. Jetty Space Wherever physical conditions permit, a 7.5m radi us space is to be kept clear at the foot of each brow. In addition the LAFB will require a space 10.5m by 5.0m for parking and operation, although certain special appliances may require a larger area. The area is to be conspicuously marked FIRE BR IGADE ACCESS - KEEP CLEAR. 2064. Brows When a ship has more than one brow, a clear indication is to be given as to which one should be used by the LAFB to come aboard. A red flag, or a red lamp by night, should be placed in a prominent position to mark the on brow. 2065. Probable Questions The following are among the questions likely to be asked by the LAFB Officer on arrival a. Is anyone missing andor injured?BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-36 UK RESTRICTEDb. Where is the fire? c. What is burning?d. Have electrical supplies to the shipfire zone been isolated?e. How long has the fires been burning?f. How did the fire start?g. What action is being taken by the Ships Staff?h. What is the state of the ships HPSW system?i. Are there any dangerous compartments adjacent?j. What is the composition of the ships Fire and Emergency Party?k. How critical is the ships stability?l. How much water has been pumped in?m. Are timber docking shores affected in dry dock only?n. Has a smoke boundary been set up? If so, where? 2066. Missing Personnel The LAFB may arrive before an accurate ch eck of personnel has been made. During the initial consultations between the LAFB and the o fficer responsible for ship safety, a decision whether search and rescue operations by the LAFB are required in preference to firefightingassistance may have to be made. 2067. Electrical Supplies The LAFB normally expect all electrical supplies to an installation on fire to be isolated. This is seldom practicable in a warship fire. However, when there is a risk of voltages in excessof 440 volts, the equipment should be isolated. It must be noted that atte mpts at maintaining a keep alive policy may be c ounter-productive when compared with the savings in damage through quick extinction of the fire. 2068. Route to Fire Once the appropriate safe route to the Forw ard Control Point FCP from the on brow has been agreed between the officer responsible for ship safety and LAFB Officer, the Ships Staff are to identify that route by running a combined guide and sound powered telephone line.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-37 Change 12069. Control of Personnel a. Strict control over the combined numbers of personnel involved in the firefighting operation will need to be exercised, and the LAFB will normally require all RNRFApersonnel not directly involved to clear the sh ip. This will be achieved by sounding the main broadcast alarm and maki ng a pipe to clear lower d eck see Chapter 7 Section 2. b. Entry to and egress from the ship is to be controlled by the gangway staff at the brows. c. LAFB personnel will at all times act under th e direction of Fire Officers. RNRFA personnel will act under the direction of the OOD or his representative. 2070. Employment of RNRFA Personnel Ships firefighters, working in pairs and wearing BA, will normally be required to act as guides. Close collaboration between the rating in charge of the ships Main Group and the LAFB Officer at the FCP is essential. The rating in charge of the ships Main Group, once relieved by the LAFB at the FCP, is to remain there. His duties will be a. To liaise with the LAFB Officer in charge at that position.b. To keep HQ1 informed of all actions being taken.c. To maintain control of all the RNRFA personnel actively engaged in firefighting. 2071. Evacuation of HQ1 Should HQ1 and AHQ need to be evacuated for any reason, it is recommended that the ships control team moves to the brow. If this is not practicable, any other location in clear air with good ships internal comm unications should be selected. 2072. Communications The ship is to provide a communication li nk from HQ1 or AHQ to the FCP, and from the brow to the FCP, manned by Ships Staff at both ends. LAFB officers will normally use theirown communications system, but these may prove inadequate in a wars hip environment and, in some cases, the associated RADHAZ prohibits thei r use. Regulations in place preclude the use of any portable communications equipment in RFAs unless the equipment is designated intrinsically safe. 2073. Disposition of RNLAFB Personnel LAFB firefighters normally mask up within the ship at their FCP. The rating ic of the Main Group will operate from the agreed FCP. HQ1 Gangway in RFAFCPCONTROL POINT JettyBrow OOD Senior Fire OfficerSpecialist PersonnelJunior Fire Officer IC Main GroupLAFB BAShips BA Controller2FO 2nd OODQuartermasterBosuns MateBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-38 UK RESTRICTED2074. Ships Staff BA Controllers should continue to control ships personnel using BA at the same time maintaining the closest possible liaison with the LAFB Controllers. Shouldfirefighting measures be assigned to the LAFB, overall coordination of all BA wearers is to beexercised by the LAFB officer in charge of th e firefighting operations. The endorsement of the combined RNLAFB FCP adjacent to the scene of the incident depends on the Fire Officerclassifying the area clean air. The rating ic of the Main Group and the RN BA Controller will be required to relocate to the LAFB FCP if control of firefighting operations passes to the LAFB. 2075. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-39 Change 2SECTION 5 - FIREFIGHTING AT SEA 2076. Standing Sea Emergency Party SSEP In all ships at sea there must be a party of specifically detailed firefighters under the charge of a suitable senior rating, which is available at all times and ready for an immediateresponse to a fire. In NBCD State 1 this requireme nt is met by the Fire a nd Repair Parties. For States 2 and 3 a Standing Sea Emergency Party SSEP is to be formed. The SSEP should be made up from daywork personnel for the State 3 situ ation and on call pers onnel for State 2. The SSEP members are to be briefed on their duties prior to the ship sailing. 2077. If the SSEP is unable to cope with a fire, e ither due to lack of personnel or shortage of material resources, it is important that the ship be piped to Emergenc y Stations in good time. This will get the right people to the right places quickly and bring the ships Fire and Repair Parties to State 1. It will also clear the area of unnecessary pers onnel, allow o ff-watch watchkeepers to be accounted for and provide back-up where necessary. The actual stage at which the ship should be piped to Emergency St ations will vary depending upon the size of the SSEP and the rate of escal ation of the incident. 2078. In order to facilitate the identification of SSEP pers onnel, coloured surcoats should be worn as detailed at Para 2028. 2079. SSEP Organisation in DDFF and Larger Ships In DDFF and larger ships, the SSEP compri ses all the firefightin g groups and parties detailed in the previous paragr aphs main, containment and speci alist, since manpower is readily available. a.SSEP Team. All the ratings should be da yworkon-call personnel and the aim should be to achieve continu ity and a well trained, worked- up team. The most suitable Attack Party senior rating is probably the CMEMM, the junior ratings should be drawn from all departments a nd one should be from the Ventilation Party. They should not be detailed as Special Sea Dutymen. b.Procedure. In DDFF and larger ships, where the SSEP comprises all the firefighting groups and parties of the full harbour organisation, the procedure to be followed is much the same as when the ship is in harbour 1 When the alarm is raised the Attack Pa rty should proceed directly to the SOTI. They are to collect portable first-aid firefighting appliances and TIC en route , and join up with such firefighters as there may be. Having established the seat andnature of the fire, they are to fight it with the appropriate appliances. Two ratingspreviously detailed should arrive at the SOTI wearing BA, and carrying portable firefighting appliances. The sixth member, the BA Controller, proceeds directly tothe FCP, ready to prepare the ratings wearing BA for entry as quickly as possible.The BA Attack Party, using portable app liances or hoses as appropriate, is to commence firefighting immediately. All members of the Attack Party are to be fullyexperienced in dressing and wearing BA as well as being capable of using a BAcontrol board.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-40 UK RESTRICTED2 In those ships with numbers other than six junior ratings in the Attack Party, the firefighting procedure should be ad justed to suit the numbers involved. 3 As soon as the initial alarm is raised, HQ1 should be manned by the Action NBCD Officer, the DCO, an incident boa rd operator, a communications number and the DWEO to advise on WE aspects switchboards should be manned by qualified switchboard operators to cras h-stop ventilation and to sa feguard electrical supplies SCCMCRER watchkeepers should put all available HPSW pumps on to the HPSW system. The first task of the communi cations number is to rig a sound powered telephone between HQ1 and the FCP. 4 The Executive Officer should briefly vis it the FCP and HQ1 in the early stages, in order to gain and up-to-the-minute appreciation of the situation so that he will beable to give advice to the Command on whether there is a need for the ship to go toEmergency Stations. c.First-Aid Firefighting During Silent Hours. It is recommended that the following on-watch ratings be de tailed to undertake first-aid firefighting until relieved by the SSEP a MEM, an OMC, a Bosuns Mate and an Operations Department rating either from theOperations Room or Watch on Deck. 2080. Containment Party To contain primary boundaries quickly, it is important that a Containment Party is provided immediately following the emergency pipe. These personnel are an integral part of the SSEP and are identified by the wearin g of blue surcoats. It is a dvantageous to have a WE senior rating as IC Containment Party, so that he can advise Deck Managers on electrical equipment and magazine hazards at th e boundaries. S hould the ship subsequently go to Emergency Stations, then personnel nominated from spare hands would au gment the Party. In capital ships, there is normally sufficient manpower available to deal with all primary boundaries, adding extra personnel from Section Bases when at Emer gency Stations. The minimum containment organisation for a typical DDFF at sea is normally as follows a. DWEOWSO - Technical advice to the DCO. b. CCPOCPOPO - IC Containment Party. c. CPOPOLH - 2IC Containment. d. Four CPOPO - Deck Managers from any department. e. All Officers of Quarters OOQ. 2081. The IC Containment Party has a roving role, visiting HQ1, WSB, the Containment HQ and containment operations as n ecessary. He is responsible t o, and briefs, the DWEOWSO in HQ1. He ensures consistency betw een the respective incident boards. 2082. The 2IC Containment is normally statione d at the nominated Containment HQ and is responsible to the IC Containment Party. He details and controls the Deck Managers and Boundary Coolers, and coordi nates TMS data from the Deck Managers see Annex 21B. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-41 Change 22083. Deck Managers are each allocated a deck as their area of responsibility. They are particularly valuable for MMS fires, which require boundary monitoring cooling on several decks and in a large number of compartments. They are responsible to the 2IC Containment for ensuring that Boundary MonitorsCoolers are in the correct location with the correct equipment to monitorcool the designated areas of the boundary. The use of diagrams and Kill Cards, particularly in high risk areas, will help to ensure that boundary cooling is effective. They are to report to the 2IC Containment when the Mon itorsCoolers are in position and undertaking their tasks. Deck Managers are then to constantly monitor their areas, briefing the 2IC on progress, including TMS data. 2084. OOQs are to report to the 2IC Containment w ith their magazine keys. Should a fire be adjacent to a magazine or ready-use locker, th e relevant OOQ should then report to the FCP to take charge of the Boundary MonitorsC oolers in the vicinity of his quarter. 2085. Boundary Monitors Coolers are to carry out their duties as detailed by their Deck Manager. They are to cool designated areas, if they are hot to the touch, and carry out temperature monitoring in accordance with the procedures in Annex 21B. 2086. SSEP Organisation in MMPPs In all MMPPs at sea an SSEP is to be nominated and available at all times for immediate response to fire and other emergencies. a.SSEP Team. The SSEP team in MMPPs is generally very small, and in the case of fire can only form an Attack Party. S hould the firefighting initiative be lost or the indications from the SOTI are that the SSEP will be unable to extinguish the fire, theANBCDO should immediately bring the ship up to Emergency Stations. The SSEPshould be made up of non-watchkeepers on the following lines 1 Control Party in HQ1. XO ANBCDO, MEO Technical advisor and an NBC Incident Board Operator. 2 Attack Party. IC at the Forward Control Point FCP with 5 hands. Provisionally allocated duties of two for Fi rst Aid Firefighters, two for Attack BA firefighters and one as Standing Sea First Aider. b.Procedure. On either a smoke or fire alarm being raised, the following procedure is to be followed 1 Command and Control. As soon as the initial alarm is raised a The Control Party should man HQ1.b ANBCDO establishes portable communications with IC SSEP. c ANBCDO breaks out the Kill Card log to identify the compartment and any associated internal or external hazards.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 20-42 UK RESTRICTEDd Incident Board Operator identifies compartment on the Incident Board together with suitable positions for establishing smoke boundaries, ready to brief ANBCDO. Note. Once the ANBCDO is satisfied that HQ1 is established, he should make the broadcast HQ1 IS MANNED, MAKE ALL REPORTS TO HQ1. This hastwo functions a. It tests and confirms that the ope ration of the main broadcast system from the HQ1 position, ie the ability to make pipes. b. Informs the OOW that the ANBCDO has closed up in HQ1 and is ready to assume responsib ility for controlling the emergency. This allows the OOW to concentrate on bridge and navigation aspects and ship safety. Until the ANBCDO makes this pipe all reports should be made to thebridge. c.Attack Party. When the alarm is raised, the IC SSEP, First Aid Firefighters and Standing Sea first Aider shoul d proceed directly to the SOTI, collecting SPEs on route. The IC SSEP should establish a safe FCP immediately adjacent to the SOTI andcommunications to the ANBCDO via his por table communications. The IC should complete his partially marked 2-man BA control board using the time of the emergencypipe as the time started to breathe. Nominated Attack BA firefighters are to collect aportable SPEAFFF and proceed to the nearest BA locker, don the BA, conduct a faceseal check and remaining on air proceed directly to the SOTI and attack the fire,whether or not the IC is present. The BA c ontrol tally should be left at the access to the SOTI to indicate the BA wearer within. The men being relieved First Aid AttackFirefighters who are not wearing BA must then withdraw. The use of ELSA should be considered if personnel are showing signs of smoke inhalation or respiratory distress. d.Containment Party. Despite the lack of manpower in MMPP, once Emergency Stations has been ordered, the principles of containment for larger ships should be followed. e.Remainder of the Ships Company. Initially the remainder of the Ships Company should stay clear of main passageways to enable clear access for the SSEP, although if in the immediate vicinity to the SOTI they should supply additional SPEs to prolong the initial aggressive attack on the fire. Ho wever, should the ANBCDO pipe the ship to Emergency Stations they mu st close up at their pre-dete rmined station, ie FRPP, FAP, Bridge, etc or muster with the spare hands.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-1 Change 3CHAPTER 21 FIREFIGHTING PROCEDURES CONTENTS Para P r e p a r a t i o n s ........................................................ 2101 Management of Firefightin g Equipment and Personnel ...................... 2102 S o u r c e s o f C o m p a r t m e n t I n f o r m a t i o n .................................... 2103 S m o k e A l a r m - R e a c t i o n .............................................. 2104 F i r s t R e p o r t a n d A c t i o n ............................................... 2105 Continuous and Aggressive Attack ...................................... 2107 I m p o r t a n t Q u e s t i o n s a t a F i r e........................................... 2109 C o n t r o l o f F i r e f i g h t i n g O p e r a t i o n s ...................................... 2110 C h o i c e o f F i r e f i g h t i n g M e t h o d ......................................... 2112 P r i n c i p l e o f E x t i n c t i o n ................................................ 2113 A p p l i c a t i o n o f t h e P r i n c i p l e s ........................................... 2114 S t a r v i n g ........................................................... 2116 C o o l i n g............................................................ 2117 S m o t h e r i n g......................................................... 2121 Precautions and Limitations of Smothering ................................ 2127 Flashover .......................................................... 2128 g47 B a c k d r a u g h t ........................................................ 2129 g47 Firefighting - Ventilation Control - Standard Procedure ...................... 2130 Stage 1 - Crash-stop Ventilation ........................................ 2132 Stage 2 - Restart Selected Ventilation Systems ............................. 2133 S t a g e 3 - P r e p a r e t o S h u t D o w n M a c h i n e r y S p a c e .......................... 2134 Stage 4 - Restore Essential Ventilation ................................... 2135 R i g g i n g o f H o s e s a n d N o z z l e s f o r F i r e I n c i d e n t s ........................... 2136 F i r e f i g h t i n g T e c h n i q u e s ............................................... 2137 4 M a n F i r e f i g h t i n g T e a m .............................................. 2141 5 M a n F i r e f i g h t i n g T e a m .............................................. 2142 Action to be taken when a BA Whistle Sounds ............................. 2143 g47 C y a l u m e s f o r F i r e f i g h t i n g T e a m I d e n t i f i c a t i o n ............................. 2144 g47 Boundary Monitoring and Cooling ...................................... 2145 g47 Ship Stability and Firefighting .......................................... 2146 g47 A l u m i n i u m S t r u c t u r e a n d F i r e .......................................... 2147 g47 G l a s s R e i n f o r c e d P l a s t i c G R P a n d F i r e.................................. 2148 g47 Fires Involving Hazardous Stores ....................................... 2150 g47 F u e l a n d L u b r i c a t i n g O i l T a n k s ......................................... 2151 g47 Machinery Space Fires ................................................ 2153 g47 G a l l e y F i r e s ........................................................ 2154 g47 G a s C y l i n d e r s....................................................... 2158 g47 D a n g e r f r o m O x y g e n E n r i c h m e n t ....................................... 2159 g47 E l e c t r i c a l E q u i p m e n t ................................................. 2160 g47 E x p l o s i v e s a n d P y r o t e c h n i c s ........................................... 2162 g47 F i r e s i n A i r c r a f t H a n g a r s .............................................. 2163 g47 F l o a t i n g O i l o r F u e l .................................................. 2165 g47 F i r e f i g h t i n g i n a C h e m i c a l E n v i r o n m e n t .................................. 2166 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-2 UK RESTRICTEDCONTENTS Continued Para S e a r c h a n d R e s c u e ................................................... 2168 g47 Post Fire Precautions - Fire Sentry ....................................... 2169 g47 W e l d i n g a n d B u r n i n g S e n t r i e s .......................................... 2170 g47 ANNEXES Annex A Re-Entry Techniques Annex B Boundary Monitoring and Cooling Annex C Machinery Space Fires Annex D Explosives and Pyrotechnics Annex E Search and Rescue Operations Annex F Smoke Alarm - Reaction Guidance Annex G Firefighting Kill Cards Annex H Firefighting in a Chemical Environment - BA Procedures Annex I Firefighting Assistance to Other Ships Annex J Gas Turbine Module Re-entry Procedures Annex K Smoke Boundary ManagementUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-3 Change 1CHAPTER 21 FIREFIGHTING PROCEDURES 2101. Preparations Serious damage through fire can generally be attributed to late discovery, faulty technique including misuse of a ppliances, or the rapid growth of fire following explosion a. Early discovery of a fire can be helped by conscientious regard of all automatic warnings and by the use of diligent patr olsrounds personnel who frequently visit all compartments, including storerooms. b. Faulty technique can be eliminated by good training, which starts at the firefighting schools and must c ontinue in the ship. Every opportunity must be taken to carry out realistic and imaginative exer cises and all personnel shoul d know where to find and how to use all firefighting appliancesequipmen t and breathing appara tus with confidence. c. The possibility of rapid growth of fire from any cause calls for a carefully prepared organisation, the strategic stowage of applian ces and the ability to concentrate appliances and firefighters rapidly in ad equate but not excessive numbe rs. Complex situations may arise when more than one compartment and or a variety of materials are involved or threatened. Explosives, combustibles, gas cylinders, etc, are possible complications. Structural damage, which might include jammed doors and hatche s, will make the firefighting task more difficult. These situations can be met with confidence if theofficers and key ratings likely to be ca lled upon to direct operations have used imagination in assessing the risks before the fire occurs and if they have a thorough knowledge of their ship and the firefighting procedures. 2102. Management of Firefighting Equipment and Personnel The limited amount of firefighting equipment a nd personnel in a ship necessitate careful management of resour ces. In particular a. When firefighting, positive efforts are required to salvage firefighting appliances from teams being relieved. Personnel must be trained to ensure that all equipment iskept under control and not needlessly lost. b. With the possibility of firefighters in EDBA working for nearly an hour, the signs and symptoms of heat stress and physical ex haustion must be understood. An organised system of feedingwatering firefighting teams is essential. Supplies of drinking watermust be easily available to all manpower containing the in cident and those working in spaces where temperature has risen due to the fire. c. Accurate identification of compartments can save wasted effort. A combination of location markings and compar tment name should be used. d. Running por table diesel or gas turbine pumps for long periods requires good fuel supply management.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-4 UK RESTRICTED2103. Sources of Compartment Information Detailed information about co mpartments can be made ava ilable to firefighting teams from the following sources a. S.3021 - Firefighting Kill Cards see Annex 21G.b. In Type 23 frigates, the Damage C ontrol Data Retrieval System DCDRS. c. Personally, from departmental specialists. 2104. Smoke Alarm - Reaction Guidance on the reaction of personnel, in the event of a smoke alarm sounding, is given at Annex 21F. 2105. First Report and Action The person discovering a fire is not nece ssarily on duty or a member of the ships firefighting team. He is known as a first aid firefighter and his immediate action must be to shout a loud vocal alarm FIRE, FIRE, FIRE and, togeth er with those personnel in the vicinity who respond to his alarm, use the equipment at hand to extinguish or contain the fire. If the attempt is unsuccessful, the first aid firefi ghter with the vital information about location, seat of fire, type of fire, etc, must report to the person who arrives to take charge of the incident and remain with him until ordered otherwise. After debriefing, he is to be escorted to HQ1 for further debriefingand, if necessary, to the Sic kbay for medical examination. 2106. Correct and prompt action by the person di scovering a fire can make the difference between the fire causing minor damage and b ecoming a major conflagra tion. The action depends on whether the fire is in an open or closed compartment. a.If Smoke is Seen to be Issuin g from Beneath a Closed Door. Suspect fire but do not open the door because, if the door is ope ned, the fire might flare up fiercely and spread rapidly. Raise the alarm by shouting FIRE, FIRE, FIRE and inform theCommand by the quickest method, ie 999 call on the ships automatic exchange, orNBCD telephone to HQ1SCCQuartermaster, or bridge, depending on the state of readiness. Pass a clear accurate message stating the location of the fire, return to thescene of the incident SOTI and rig hoses for containmentre-entry. b.If the Door is Open or th e Fire is not Behind a Door. If a fire is discovered in an open compartment, raise a loud vocal alarm by shouting FIRE, FIRE, FIRE and tryto extinguish it with the equipment to hand. The command must be informed by thequickest method if a second person is present he must attend to this. If the finder is doubtf ul of his ability to extinguish the fire, he should shut all openings to the compartment, rig hoses for containmentre-en try, ensure the Command is informed and report to the person who arrives to take charge of the incide nt. If the retreating personnel g47 have time, it may be possible to remove the blanking cap from a through-bulkhead g47 HPSW connector. This would aid subseque nt survey of the closed compartment. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-5 Change 32107. Continuous and Aggressive Attack Fires will usually spread quickly if the firefighting effort is interrupted, so it is essential that a continuous and aggressive a ttack is maintained from the moment of discovery. If First Aid Firefighters are unable to extinguish a fire, they should attempt to main tain a continuous attack until the Attack Party take over. If the compartment becomes untenable, the First AidFirefighters may have to retreat to the door or hatch to fight th e fire, but they should attempt to limit smoke and flame to the compartment without shutting the door or hatch the use of a waterwall nozzle or a fixed hatc h waterwall should be considered . This will obviate the need for a compartment full re-entry. The same applie s to the Support Party relie ving the Attack Party. The standard time within which the Attack BA should arrive at the Scene Of The Incident g47 SOTI, is 2 minutes. The Support Party should re port to the IC FCP within 8 minutes of the g47 alarm being raised. These times are for durin g normal working hours and it is accepted that g47 during silent hours it ma y take longer for personnel to arrive. g47 2108. The continuous and aggressive attack must not be allowed to endanger the ship or personnel. If firefighters are in adequately protected or equipped, they may be beaten back. eg while waiting for a waterwall nozzle. If this happens, the compartment door or hatch should be closed and preparations made for a full re-entry. The decision to shut the door or hatch must be taken by the person at the scene of the incident. 2109. Important Questions at a Fire a. The initial concerns of the person taking charge at the Forward Control Point FCP must be to find out 1 Where is the fire? The s cene of the incident SOTI. 2 What is burning?3 When did it start?4 How did it start?5 Is there anybody fighting the fire? Has a continuous and aggressive attack been maintained? 6 Are there any casualties present?7 Have the boundaries of the fire been established and is monitoringcooling under way. 8 What are the immediate dangers? eg fuel tanksmagazines, structural damage. 9 Has communication been established to HQ1SCC?Note. These initial questions must be as ked, within the first two minutes. The discoverer of the fire, if there is one, may well be able to answer most of these. b. From these broad considerations , more detailed questions arise 1 Have all the Attack Party arrived and are they using the right equipment?BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-6 UK RESTRICTED2 Has effective control over smoke been achieved, with smoke boundaries identified? see Annex K 3 Has ventilation been crash stopped?4 Has the FCP been established in the right area, affording the best entry into the scene of the incident? 5 Has the Command Aim been given? In NBCD States 1 and 2.6 Are any more appliances required from other parts of the ship? Will more personnel be required? 7 Is smoke present in such a manner as to give false impression of the seat of the fire? 8 Are Support Party personnel available and getting dressed? 9 Have all relevant is olations been made? 10 Are HQ1SCC aware of the water levels? c. When the fire appears to be out , the following questions remain 1 Is it really out? Have charred solid s been broken up and wetted? Is any insulation still smouldering? 2 Is there any danger of spontaneous re -ignition? Can the danger be prevented? Has a sentry been posted? 3 What damage is there to electrical apparatus? Has HQ1SCC been consulted about the precautions that might be necessary? 4 Are all personnel accounted for?5 How are smoke and water clearance going to be achieved? 2110. Control of Firefighting Operations A serious fire cannot be eff ectively controlled unless there is well coordinated control of the firefighters see Chapter 20. The direction of all firefighters in a single fire zone must beunified and remain so. Take-ove r of control by a senior person, if necessary, must be carried out with the greatest of care and only after he has assessed the situation. Inopportune taking over, contradictory orders from different sources and overcrowding of a FCP constitute serioushindrances to firefighting. While the first actions at a fire are with the person who discovers it,hands should not join in the fighting of an esta blished fire except as directed by the person in charge at the FCP. Spare hands should be must ered, Emergency Stations at sea or Emergency Clear Lower Deck in harbour clear of the fire zone, where they will be immediately availablewhen needed. Sentries, if possible, shoul d be posted to keep the fire zone clear.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-7 Original 2111. Except in very small ships and then only in emergency, the person in charge of the FCP should not actively operate a firefighting appliance. It is his duty to ensure the fire is beingaggressively attacked and that the fire is not spreading beyond the established boundaries, to appreciate any possible complicati ons and take anticipatory acti on, and to keep in touch with HQ1SCC and in particular, be re sponsible for the safety of personnel. The person in charge should position the FCP as close as possible to the SOTI outside the danger area and smoke boundary. Whenever po ssible, he should try to utilise fixed communication systems to HQ1SCC. 2112. Choice of Firefighting Method Having discovered the fire s ituation, the person in charge at the FCP must choose the most suitable technique and call for appliances, some of which may have to come from otherparts of the ship. Speed is essential in the firs t attack, but should the firs t measure fail to contain the fire, a careful assessment of the situation is as important as speed. The right action in goodtime is better than the wrong action too quickly. Since fire depends upon a reaction between two substances and is sustained by self-generated heat, there are three ways of extinguishing a fire a. Take away the heat faster than it is generated.b. Separate the substances.c. Interfere with the chemical reaction that takes place between the fuel and the oxygen. Fig 21-1. The Fire Triangle Note. The fire triangle is explained in simple terms in BR 4007 - Guide to Ship Firefighting. 2113. Principle of Extinction Assuming that a fuel is burning in oxygen drawn from the air, two methods of separating the substances may be possible. Either air or fuel may be prevented from reaching the fire. Consequently, the firefighter has three aims a. To starve the fire by removing solid co mbustibles or by cutting off the supply of fuel either in its liquid or gaseous state. b. To cool the fire and its surroundings to a temperature at which it dies through lack of heat.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-8 UK RESTRICTEDc. To smother the fuel by preventing air from reaching it, or by diluting the air with some form of inert gas. These aims are the principles of firefighting and self-descriptive names can be given to them STARVING, COOLING and SMOTHERING. 2114. Application of the Principles Firefighters should keep all three principles in mind when attacking a fire. They should use the structure of the ship itself and the various installations, to assist the fire appliances theyare using. The closing of watertight doors and hatches or the shutting dow n of appropriate valves on fuel supply lines and ventilation systems may prove as important as the use of any fire appliance. In fighting major fires, a change in the course of the ship may be warranted to preventfires from being fanned and to assist in smoke clearance. 2115. More than one principle is brought into effect from most firefighting appliances even though a single principle dominates the extinguishi ng process. If this is understood, firefighters may safely classify their appliances according to their major function. 2116. Starving There are certain obvious ways of starving a fire. Take combustibles away from a fire and the fire will not burn so long. With uncontrolled fires, removing combustible solids fromthe immediate vicinity will limit the spread of the fire. If a fire is fed by liquid fuel flowing froma burst pipe, isolation by the appr opriate control valve is an essential precaution. If a fire can be completely isolated it will eventually die from lack of fuel. Allowing a fire to burn-out in thisway is justifiable in some cases when the bur ning substance contains or produces oxygen, however this means of extinguishing a fire is hazardous and slow. 2117. Cooling Heat is a form of energy, and cannot be de stroyed. Cooling is the alteration of this energy from a destructive force into innocuous en ergy. Water is an excellent cooling agent. Projected on to a fire it takes a certain amount of heat to bring it to boiling point and about six times as much to turn it to steam. The firefighter must initially seek to remove the heat energyby cooling the flame and not the fuel. In an open area, steam carries the heat away. In a partiallyclosed compartment, both the heat and the steam may fail to escape entirely, but the heat will bedistributed and the temperature of the fuel will be reduced. Th e steam will also pr oduce a smothering effect. 2118. The absence of flame does not necessarily mean that the fire has been extinguished. Transfer of heat within the fuel may lead to th e renewal of flame. This may occur hours or even days afterward. Therefore, when the flames disappear, solids must be separated and broken up so that the insides, as well as the outside, are cooled. A metal compartment in which a fire hasbeen burning may have parts hot enough to re-ign ite the contents. Hence, the whole fire zone must be cooled to a temperature well below that at which flames disappear. The decrease intemperature of hot substances, and the prevention of cool substances from getting hotter, areclosely related in the processes of fire extincti on. Both ideas are inherent in the principle of cooling.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-9 Original2119. Water is available in a plentiful supply fro m the sea, so there is a temptation to be extravagant with its use and this can be almost as dangerous as the fire itself. Water should therefore always be used as a spray except when it is necessary to break up and drench masses after the flames are extinguished. The following facts about water must always be remembered a. It is heavy. One litre of water weights one kilogram. Water partially filling any compartment, has a free surface which will hamp er the stability of the ship. The higher in the ship or the further from the centre line, the greater the problem. b. Most liquid fuels are lighter than water so they will float and may continue to burn while doing so. This may become a serious hazard in bilges, tanks etc. If water is introduced to a burning liquid that is at such a temperature, the water will boil and turnto steam. The expansion will cast the burning liquid out violently. c. Sea water is liable to cause permanent damage to electrical equipment and temporary damage to most machinery. It may cause lethal shock when used as a jet onlive electrical equipment. The use of fresh water does little permanent damage tomachinery and the dangers of shock ar e not so high as with sea water. d. Application of water will prevent the transfer of heat from bulkheads, etc or from one explosive charge to another, and thus prevent ignition. It will not necessarily stop an explosive charge from burning once it has become ignited. Oxygen continues to be evolved by the explosive even when it is drowned in water. e. Water, a very stable compound, is com posed of oxygen and the flammable gas hydrogen, it can react chemically with some substances 1 Even when cold, it reacts violently w ith some substances to produce flamable gas. Potassium, sodium and calcium, whic h are found in some medical stores, react producing hydrogen. 2 When very hot, certain light metals used in the construction of aircraft react with water. These metals are able to burn in air. If water is applied at a slow rate,the generation of hydrogen may cause an intensification of the fire but, providing that the metals are not present in great quantities and the rate of water applied ishigh, the cooling effect outweighs any danger from hydrogen generation. 3 Iron will not burn in air, but at 700C it can burn in the presence of steam with the generation of hydrogen. 4 When limited quantities of either water or steam come into contact with hot carbon, a result is water gas, a flamma ble mixture of both hydrogen and carbon monoxide. 2120. With these facts in mind, the most efficient use of water must be made to extinguish fires. For most situations a spray will be used. Water broken up into the fine particles that forma spray has a larger surface area than the same volume of water projected in the form of acontinuous jet. In contact with a large hot surface, the transfer of heat to the water particles is very rapid. Hence, the cooling effect is very ra pid and spray is particul arly suitable for cooling large surfaces. The jet is most effective in dea ling with structural fire s and other fires involving metals.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-10 UK RESTRICTED2121. Smothering Smothering is the process of preventing oxygen from reaching a fire. Applying a wetted, or even dry cloth over a chip pan on fire, can smother it. Shutting a ll doors and hatches to a compartment and crash-stopping ve ntilation is another way to smot her a fire. But, because many combustibles contain oxygen, the process can be slow. As mentioned ear lier, the discoverer of a fire must raise the alarm to summon help. If the fire is obviously beyond the capabilities of the discoverer to extinguish or even control, he must contain it by shutting all openings to thecompartment, to prevent air oxygen from getting to the fire. 2122. AFFF is the most effective and readily available smothering agent, especially against burning hydrocarbon liquid fuels that are not mis cible. It rapidly pr oduces an air oxygen excluding film of water over the surface of th e burning liquid and even when that film is disturbed, it will quickly reform. AFFF is also effective agains t paper, wood rags, etc, because it improves the penetration of water to extinguish deep-seated fires. 2123. Dry powder is a quick and effective smotheri ng agent but the extinction is often only temporary. Its most effective use is against low flash point liquid fuel fires. Its swift knockdown effect on the flames is very effective in preventing further fire spread, allowing firefightersaccess to burning aircraft etc. However, dry powder does not form a permanent seal or remove heat, so AFFF must be us ed immediately as back up. 2124. Carbon dioxide CO 2 is an inert gas and will neith er burn nor support combustion. It is heavier than air and displaces oxygen by forming a temporary blanket. It is mainly used forelectrical fires but some ships have CO 2 drench smothering systems fitted to machinery spaces. It must be remembered that CO2 will not support life in conc entrations over 17 in the atmosphere. 2125. HALON 1301 BTM has some minimal smotheri ng qualities but its main extinguishing method is by chemically interfering with the r eaction that takes place between the fuel and the oxygen. It is normally used in machinery spaces. 2126. Steam is an inert vapour but it is lighter than air and must be blown into the compartment. Steam drench systems are fitted in LPDs and nuclear submarines. It is veryeffective in a compartment properly cl osed down but has no cooling effect. 2127. Precautions and Limitations of Smothering Ships staffs are to ensure that relevant closing down and evacuation procedures appertaining to them are clearly laid down in Ships NBCD Orders and understood. The following points must be considered a. Trying to smother a fire where all the oxygen required to complete the combustion process is mixed with the fuel, as with explosives, would be ineffective. Such anattempt would interfere with the venting of the products of combustion and increase the rate of flame generation and pressure. Consequently, expl osives burning comparatively slowly might explode.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-11 Change 3b. Smothering methods are slow and unpredictable if some of the oxygen required for combustion is held within the body of th e combustibles eg tex tiles, wood and other organic substances. c. Hydrocarbon liquid fuels do not liberate ox ygen so require an independent source of oxygen if they are to burn. 2128. Flashover g47 A Flashover occurs in fires when there is no shortage of oxygen. In any compartment fire there may be a stage where the radiated heat from fire and hot gases at deckhead level are g47 sufficient to ignite much of the remaining combustible material in the compartment. Thistransition from a localised fire to total compartment fire can be very rapid. 2129. Backdraught g47 A backdraught can only occur in fires where there has been a period of oxygen starvation. ie a compartment closed down. Th e heat in a compartment will still decompose the materials within, producing flammable gases but due to the lack of oxygen they will not ignite. The introduction of new fresh air results in thes e gases igniting, possibly explosively. This backdraught can take place immediately or when a new source of ignition is introduced, such as firefighters exposing smouldering material. Gases produced in a fire may well escape the compartment via cable runs, vent trunking, etc and build up in another compartment away from the initial fire source. These gases in turn could ignite with the introducti on of a separate ignition source such as sparking from electrical equipment. g47 2130. Firefighting - Ventilation Co ntrol - Standard Procedure The aim of this procedure is to reduce the flow of air to a compartment and limit the spread of smoke, in the shortest possible time, after the discovery of a fire. It is easily understood and can be applied in all NBCD states, and conditions, at s ea and in harbour, namely by a. Crash stopping all ventilation fans as s oon as the alarm is raised. This action contributes significantly towards the aim a nd also produces a known state of ventilation, which is essential for subseque nt control procedures. The various minor disadvantages, which will result from a complete crash stop of ventilation in some ships, must beidentified and overcome by good training, and discipline, in the standard procedure. b. Closing smoke curtains in the ship section containing the fire and in adjacent sections. c. Restoring power to all ven tilation systems so that they may be restarted under the control of HQ1SCC or OOD in order to 1 Supply ventilation to essential systems. 2 Supply ventilation to areas of the ship not affected by the fire. 3 Contain the smoke within the desired boundary.4 Reduce the supply of air to the fire.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-12 UK RESTRICTED5 Remove smoke from areas adjacent to the fire. 6 Remove all smoke and fumes after extinction. 2131. The NBCD Orders concerning firefighti ng in DDFF and MMPP are to reflect the following paragraphs concerning ventilation control. Larger ships are to adapt these instructionsto suit their particular ventilation design features, possibly on an NBCD Section basis. In allships the Officer in Charge of firefighting operations must have the authority to modify theinstructions if exceptional circumstances warrant it. A generic example of a Smoke ClearancePlan is at Fig 21G-3. 2132. Stage 1 - Crash- stop Ventilation Immediately the fire alarm is raised the following actions are to be taken a. Open all main machinery and general ventilation breakers at the switchboard or SCCMCR central crash-stop panel. After a pa use for five seconds, re-close the breakers to restore the electrical supply to local fan starters. However, those ships with in-line switches fitted to some general ventilation fans ie 6 inch fans in MMs must ensure thatthese switches are opened before their respec tive breakers are re-closed, otherwise these fans will restart automatically. b. Trip the local starters of general ventilation fans, which are not controlled, from the ventilation breaker see Note 1 below. c. Re-set ventilation moulded case circuit breakers MCCBs tripped when breakers were opened ships fitted with Electrical Distribution Centres EDCs only. Notes 1. The following fans should not be st opped because they will not spread smoke to other areas, and their continuous operation is re quired. If affected by fire, the electrical supplies to the system or unit should be isol ated in conjunction with other equipment in the compartment. a. ACUs fitted in individual compartments to re-circulate cooled air in that compartment only. b. Full re-circulation ATU systems serv ing only unmanned spaces for equipment cooling purposes. c. Closed-circuit equipment cooling syst ems which are independent on the ships ventilation system. 2. The effectiveness of this procedure de pends on regular and thorough briefing of the personnel nominated for the various tasks, and their practice in the drill.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-13 Change 12133. Stage 2 - Restart Select ed Ventilation Systems Electrical supplies must be made available to all ventilation systems as soon as possible after crash stopping so that systems essential to the ships function and which do not interfere with the firefighting operations, or the establis hment of a smoke boundary etc, can be restarted. The following guidelines are to be used by pe rsonnel tasked with using the ventilation systems to control contain or remove smoke during and after a fire a. The spread of smoke is a major factor in preventing a clear appreciation of the source and extent of a fire and in prev enting the adoption of effective firefighting measures. Regular practice, using smoke generators and Ramfans and detailed ship knowledge are essential, always bearing in mind that cold smoke does not always behave in exactly the same manner as hot smoke. b. It is vital that, in the earliest stages of a fire, efforts are made to isolate the smoke into the smallest area that is consistent with the need to gain access to the fire see g47 Annex K. g47 c. Early consideration must also be given to the removal of smoke in order to assist with containment. In almost all cases this can be done effectively by selective use of the ventilation systems, the Ramfan can assist in this removal but consideration must begiven to the effects on the HPSW main but this requires great care since forced smokeremoval may encourage the fire. When planning smoke clearance routes, the effect ofsmoke in previously uncontaminated spaces must be taken into account. d. In general, ventilation systems should not be used to remove smoke from a compartment in which a fire is burning, a nd care is necessary in removing smoke from a compartment adjacent to the fire and thr ough which the firefighting team will have to pass in order to reach the fire. Withdrawin g smoke by means of an exhaust fan which is sited at some distance from the scene of the fire may fill previously clearcompartments with toxic smoke and become a hazard to unprotected members of the firefighting and containment teams. e. The most effective fans for the clearance of smoke are those in the main machinery spaces and the galley, and dedicated smoke clearance fans. f. Care must be taken that smoke is not picked up by the suctions of the HP air compressors, or systems supplying habitable compartments. g. When using main exhaust fans a route to atmosphere must be opened up to allow g47 make-up air into the ship. h. Should the ship suffer major structural da mage above the waterline, the use of the g47 newly created opening should be consider ed for blowing smoke through to the atmosphere.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-14 UK RESTRICTEDi. Smoke may be removed by blowing or sucking. Except in the simplest cases, eg g47 where the fire area is adjacent to an upper d eck opening or, in action, a hole in the ships structure, sucking is to be preferred becau se it gives much better control of the smoke. It is not possible to predict where smoke will go when it is blown. j. Consideration should be give n to altering the ships c ourse relative to the wind in g47 order to blow exhausted smoke away from ve ntilation inlets or areas in use on the upper deck. k. In Condition Alfa, a balance must be struck between the need to clear smoke and g47 the risk of contaminating the c itadel. In this event the use of the AFU air supply to blow the smoke out through a machinery space can be effective. 2134. Stage 3 - Prepare to Shut Down Machinery Space If the fire is in a machinery space. Imme diately following the crash stop, all supply and exhaust ventilation flaps are to be closed to seal a main machinery space on fire, in case the first aid firefighting measures fail and the fixed firefighting installation has to be used at short notice. Notes 1. When using steam drench or CO2 fixed firefighting system s, one pre-designated exhaust ventilation flap is to be left closed but unclipped to prevent over pressurisation when the system is used. When the system has been discharged, and the pressure relieved, this flap is to beclipped shut. This ruling does not apply to co mpartments fitted with BCF or BTM gaseous fixed firefighting systems where all ventilation flaps should be shut and clipped before use. 2. Detailed procedures for Main Mach inery Space fires are at Annex 21C. 2135. Stage 4 - Restore Essential Ventilation As soon as possible after the crash stop, th e Officer in Charge of the firefighting operation must assess the fire situ ation, and with the aid of reports from the scene of the incident, and the ventilation information he ld in HQ1SCC, ensure that smoke boundaries to the affected areas have been established. He should then issu e the necessary instructi ons to restore essential ventilation, in accordance with the Command Aim h aving ensured that smoke will not be drawn back into the ship from the weather deck terminals of any exhaust fans used by the shipsfirefighters. A record of the smoke boundary esta blished, and subsequent re storation of essential ventilati on, should be kept in HQ1SCC. Thorough training and exercises are necessary to ensure that the time taken to rest ore ventilation is minimised, and that it is restored wit hout further spread of smoke. 2136. Rigging of Hoses and Nozzles for Fire Incidents g47 Each fire incident must be individually a ssessed, but generic guidance for the rigging of g47 hoses and nozzles is as follows g47 g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-15 Change 1a. During the initial attack phase for a car bonaceous fire, if the initial attack with g47 extinguishers proves ineffective, the early de ployment of a firefighter nozzle, used in g47 ragged spray, may well extinguish the fire. All internal hose baskets are fitted with g47 firefighter nozzles. They can be safely opera ted by one person and can also be used for g47 boundary cooling and in personal protection mode should it be necessary to withdraw g47 from the compartment. g47 g47 b. If heat or smoke forces the initial att ack personnel to withdraw to the compartment g47 doorhatch, consideration should be given to rigging a wate rwall nozzle or fixed hatch g47 waterwall. This will allow the doorhatch to remain open for the Attack BA wearers or g47 first two dressed Support Part y members to continue the attack on the fire. Note g47 however, that extinguishers do not have the force to effectively penetrate a waterwall. g47 The Waterwall Operator must also be backed up when operating the nozzle through its g47 full range. g47 g47g47 WARNING g47 g47 FIREFIGHTERS MUST BE AWARE OF THE HAZARD OF ELECTRIC g47 SHOCK IF WATER IS SPRAYED ON LIVE EQUIPMENT DURING THE g47 INITIAL ATTACK PHASE g47 g47 c. When rigging for a 3-hose re-entry, the Ship Protector hose should be rigged first, g47 underneath the firefighter and waterwall hoses . This will help to minimise the problems g47 of hoses snagging against each other during the re-entry. g47 2137. Firefighting Techniques g47 Re-entry firefighting techniques are detailed in Annex 21A. They are also illustrated in BR 4007. The techniques are based on easily accessible doors and hatc hes, but in battle conditions the firefighting teams, in particular the Team Leader, may have to modify them. Veryfew hatches in a ship have enough space around them for the full team to get into ideal positions before re-entry. 2138. Flame, smoke, heat, darkness and structural damage may hinder access to the seat of a g47 fire. With the aid of breathing apparatus and good ship-knowledge, smoke need not be an insurmountable barrier. Some protection from flame-lick can be gained by the use of a waterwall.When fighting a fire without the aid of a BA, the firefighter should crouch on one knee, because g47 at this level there is usually a layer of clear and cooler air. Once firefighters start to tackle the g47 fire using first aid appliances, the steam pr oduced may force the smoke layer down, rendering g47 the compartment untenable. g47 2139. Before opening the door or hatch to a co mpartment containing a fire, the following preparations must be made a. Rig hoses of sufficient length to reach the furthest part of the compartment. Water supply to each hose should be from separate hydrants. A Y piece should not be used to supply a teams waterw all and firefighter hoses. b. All hoses should be fitted with the corr ect nozzle and fully charged where possible prior to the Support Party going on air.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-16 UK RESTRICTEDc. When using a FB5X foam making branchpi pe, consideration should be given to use of an inline inductor adjacent to the hydran t. This can be outside the smoke boundary, allowing easier tending of the foam drums. d. If the entry door opens away from the fire fighters, a lanyard should be attached to the handle so that the door can be pulled shut if necessary. e. If the re-entry is from below, a waterwall mounting pole will be required. 2140. If damage to the structure prevents a direct approach to the seat of a fire, it may be necessary to use portable cutting equipment, but only on the orders of HQ1. A hole just largeenough to take a firefighter no zzle may be all that is necessary. Before cutting a hole, the following points should be considered a. If possible, the pressure in the compartme nt should be tested, using an indicator test plug. b. Signs of blistering or charring may be us eful in choosing the best location for a hole. c. The effect on watertight or gastight integrity may not be acceptable.d. The admission of air though th e hole may increase the fire. e. Damage to essential services on the other side of the bulkhead may be minimised if the hole is cut in a known clear area. 2141. 4-Man Firefighting Team g47 For a relatively simple re-entry into a compartment containing a fire, a 4-man team, such g47 as the HFEP Support Party, can be used a.Team Leader. Leads the team, and carries a Thermal Imaging Camera TIC and opens hatches. b.Waterwall Operator. Operates the waterwall nozzle. c.Firefighter. Operates the firefighter nozzle or FB5X foam making branchpipe and g47 opens doors. d.Hydrant Operator. Operates the hydrants and tends the hoses including the fixed hatch waterwall, if used. 2142. 5-Man Firefighting Team g47 For a more complicated re-entry , a 5-man team can be used g47 a.Team Leader. Leads the team, carries the TIC and opens hatches. b.Waterwall Operator. Operates the waterwall nozzle.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-17 Change 3c.Firefighter. Operates the firefighter nozzle or FB5X foam making branchpipe and g47 opens doors. d.Ship Protector. Operates the containment waterwall nozzle. e.Hydrant Operator. Operates the hydrants and tends the hoses. Note. Any number of additional Ho se Tenders may be necessary. g47 2143. Actions to be taken when a BA Whistle Sounds g47 The overriding principle upon a whistle sounding is a safe withdrawal of the team, g47 consolidating their attack on the fire wherev er possible. This should be accomplished by g47 withdrawing the team to the door or hatch, shu tting the door or hatch, l eaving whichever member g47 of the team has the highest pressure as a sent ry with a controllable source of water and to g47 withdraw the remainder of the team back to the FCP. Alternatively to maintain a continuous and g47 aggressive attack, if onl y one team members whistle is s ounding not the Team Leaders the g47 Team Leader may use his discretion to decide if the position of the person whose whistle is g47 sounding can safely be taken by another member of the team. Depending upon the circumstances g47 this may be conducted within the compartment or by withdrawing the team back to the g47 doorhatch. If this action is taken the person w hos whistle is sounding should be sent back to g47 the FCP, with an escort if possible depending on the distance. The Team Leader will need to take g47 into account the condition of the rest of his team, their time on air and the remaining EDBA g47 pressures. g47 2144. Cyalumes for Firefight ing Team Identification g47 In circumstances of low visibility, eg a smoke-logged compartment, the delay caused by firefighters trying to identify who they are to relieve may result in the initial re-entry team being relieved after their whistles ha ve sounded. To alleviate this problem, personnel involved in firefighting management are to employ the following guidelines for identification of key firefighting re-entry team members a. A coloured cyalume, dependent on the re -entry team members function is to be connected to the rear of the team members BA belly band by a cable tie. Activation and fitting of the cyalumes should be comple ted just prior to the re-entry brief. b. The following colour coding is to be used 1 Team Leader - Green.2 Firefighter - Red.3 Waterwall Operator - Blue.4 Hydrant Operator - Green may wear 2 if considered necessary. c. Cyalumes are only to be used by a re-entry team following the complete closure and containment of a compartment and their provi sion must not interfere with the efficiency of a continuous and aggre ssive attack on the fire. d. A minimum of 6 green, 3 red, and 3 blue see BR 21703 for stock numbers are to be stored in each fire locker and upper deck re-entry locker.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-18 UK RESTRICTED2145. Boundary Monitoring and Cooling g47 Guidance on monitoring and cooling the boundaries of ship fires is at Annex 21B. Intact bulkheads and decks lined with fire barrier insu lation eg A60 bulkheads, described in Chapter 29 will effectively contain a fire for a limited period without cooling. In such situations, priority should be given to temperature m onitoring, rather than cooling. 2146. Ship Stability and Firefighting g47 Ship stability is dealt with in Chapter 30. The officerrating in charge of firefighting operations may not be in a position to judge the effect of firefighting water on ship stability, soguidance must be given by HQ1SCC. It is advisable to remove water as quickly as it isintroduced to a fire, by pumping out or draining downout. In newer ships, drain plugs are fittedin some decks for this purpose. A ship could be in more danger from free surface water thanit is from the fire. 2147. Aluminium Structure and Fire g47 Unless aluminium structure is suitably protected by insulation lagging or by the cooling effect of water when involved in fire it will, in simple language, melt. Aluminium is non- combustible and will neither contribute fuel to, nor assist in, the spread of fire. However, attemperatures above about 250C the load carryin g capacity of aluminium is seriously reduced. It melts at about 650C. Therefore, in that resp ect, if an aluminium structure is involved in a ship fire, it can materially assist in the spread of fire by no longer acting as a fire boundary. Fallen cables and other services that had been secured to the deckheadbulkhead by aluminium hangers, which are destroyed in fire, may seri ously hamper firefighting measures. 2148. Glass Reinforced Plastic GRP and Fire g47 Use of Glass Reinforced Plastic GRP for construction of ships poses two particular problems in respect of fire a. Dense smoke is evolved from burning of the surface resin.b. There may be a marked reduction in strength of GRP with increase of temperature. 2149. The GRP beneath the layer of surface resin is ve ry resistant to penetration by fire and the g47 structure is an effective insulator. A fire in one compartment will not create a localised hot-spotin an adjacent space. However, heat will be tr ansferred laterally acro ss the GRP laminate and can cause remote hot-spots in through-bulkhead pipework, cabling, securing bolts, etc. When the surface resin is heated it produces a strong pungent smell before ignition, thus providing an effective early warning of potentia l fire. Boundary coolers must be extremely vigilant and ensure that likely heat-soaks are regu larly monitored and prompt acti on taken, should secondary fires occur. Notwithstanding the excellent insulation properties associated with GRP, the basicprinciples of boundary cooling still apply, ie a minimum of a CFHR or a charged hose with a firefighter nozzle nozzle turned off until required. 2150. Fires Involving Hazardous Stores g47 Details of the chemical cons tituents of codified hazardous stores are available on the Hazardous Stores Information System HSIS, wh ich is held on CD by Naval Stores. As the hazard from such stores may be increased in a fire, it is important that this information is readilyavailable. Chapter 25 contains specific information on materials used in aircraft, their associatedhazards and the resultant firefighting procedures. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-19 Change 32151. Fuel and Lubricating Oil Tanks g47 Fuels and lubricating oils can present a considerable hazard in the vicinity of a fire. However, cold liquid fuel in a full tank is safer than fuel vapour in a partially fille d tank. The following questions should be considered by the MEOOWMEOOD when advising the MEOOOD and by the Action NBCDO in State 1 a. Is there associated action damage or is it solely a fire incident?b. If there is actionheat damage, is a ready- use tank or associated pipe work ruptured, and therefore supplying fuel to the fire in that space? c. Are emergency dump or rundown facilities f itted to the tank? Compartment Kill Cards should state this information. If this is so 1 Would dumping reduce the amount of fuel and so assist the extinction of the fire? 2 Would pressing the fuel tank full cause further supplies of fuel to reach the fire via damaged fuel transfer pipes? d. Where does the dumped fuel go to? If to an adjacent overflow tank or bilge, have they sufficient receiving capacity and would this promote further hazards? e. Would vital power supplies still be available if the tank contents were dumped?f. Is it possible to fill the tank 100 per cent fu ll, ie does it have a float operated inlet valve and does it have an ove rflow? If it has an overflow, where does it overflow to? 2152. Bulk storage tanks pose additional questions g47 a. Is the tank seawater compensated and therefore already full?b. If the tank is structurally sound and the sy stems are intact, is fuel likely to escape from dip tubes or air escapes when it is presse d full? If so, take precautions to ensure that the fuel is not allowed to overflow via these openings. 2153. Machinery Space Fires g47 Guidance on fighting machinery space fires is given at Annex 21C. 2154. Galley Fires g47 Fire in a galley is usually the result of spillage andor the overheating of trays and utensils in ovens or on hot plates, particularly when the equipment is left unattended. Deep fat fryers present a serious hazard because of the quan tity of fat or oil they contain. In common with all other galley equipment, deep fryers should ne ver be left unattended wh en they are switched on. 2155. If a galley fire breaks out, the immediate local action must be g47 a. Switch off power to the equipment locally, stop the galley vent and raise the alarm.b. Shut the fire baffle locally see Chapter 18.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-20 UK RESTRICTEDc. If the fire is in the deep fryer, shut the lid. d. Attack the fire with a 9-litre SPEAFFF. 2156. If the fire is not extinguished by the above immediate local action a. Switch off power at master switc hes sited outside the galley door. b. If local closing of the fire baffle is not possible shut it by remote operation at the galley door, stop the galley ve nt and raise the alarm. c. Shut the weather deck ter minal to the galley exhaust trunking. Cooling the trunking with water spray may help to prevent the spread of fire. 2157. A fire that is beyond fighting with first aid measures should be attacked with a FB5X g47 foam making branchpipe, used under close supervis ion because of the dangers inherent in a fat fire. Fire parties must be exercised regularly in the correct drill to deal with a galley fire. Water must never be used except for boundary cooling, and CO2 is not recommended because it has insufficient cooling effect and re-ignition is most likely once the CO2 has dispersed. 2158. Gas Cylinders g47 All cylinders containing compressed or lique fied gases are potentially dangerous in the presence of fire. As the cylinders get hot, the gas pressure increases and if it rises excessively the cylinders may explode. There is a double ri sk with highly combustible gases such as hydrogen and acetylene the cylinders may explode and the gas, when released, may cause further explosions. This latter risk is greater between decks. If a flame is seen coming from the gas tubes of cuttingwelding apparatus, the first need is to shut off the gas at the cylinder valve the flame will then go out. If the flame is put out first, an explosive mixture might build up before the gas supply is shut off. Relevant personnel must ensure they have immediate access to all data and safety sheets of combustible gas cylinders. Gas cylinders should if possible, be removed from the fire zone. If this is not possible they must be kept cool w ith a continual spray, ie acetylene, if involved in a fire must be cooled for a minimum of one hour before it can safely be moved, and then placed in a bath of water for a further twelve hours. 2159. Danger from Oxygen Enrichment g47 Normal air contains 21 percent of oxygen. In air which contains more than that oxygen- enriched, flammability, ie ease of ignition, co mbustion rates and combustion temperatures all increase. Materials such as clothing, which do not burn readily in air, burn much more actively in an atmosphere which is enriched with oxyge n. An oxygen content increase of only four per cent gives rise to a particularly dangerous situation. A further ha zard is that, under pressure, and in the presence of heat such as can be generate d by opening the valve of an oxygen cylinder too rapidly, oxygen will react to oil and grease with a violent explosive force. The utmost care must be exercised whenever oxygen is being used onboard ship, particularly if within a confined space. Oxygen cylinders must be turned off and th e reducing valve removed whenever they are unattended.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-21 Change 32160. Electrical Equipment g47 Electrical fires are so called because, usually, some fault in a live electrical circuit has generated enough heat to ignite insulation, paint, or some othe r combustible substance close to it. Giving the name electrical to this type of fire serves to inform the firefighters of the precautions they must take and enables the correct firefighting technique to be employed. A fire which may start with solids or liquid fuels and subsequently involves liv e electrical equipment or circuits becomes, in effect, an electrical fire. It is important, therefore to switch off all electrical circuits in the vicinity of a fire , provided that it can be done without detriment to essential services, eg firefighting pumps. When power is off, what was an electrical fire is a straightforward fire of the combustibles presen t and should be attacked with the appropriate equipment. In the event of minor fire symptoms, eg a small smoke emission from within an electronic cabinet or switchboard, these may all disappear once all power supplies are removed. Some discretion is therefore necessary in the initial firefighting action. 2161. The actions, which should be taken, are g47 a.Fire in Low or Medium Voltage Equipment. Isolate the power supply and attack the fire with CO2. The use of CO2 should not be delayed if power cannot be removed. However, re-ignition is likely until isolation is achieved. If this action does not extinguish the fire it should be treated as an ordi nary fire and attacked with water. If the power cannot be switched off, it is possibl e, at voltages up to 440 V ac or 800 V dc to use water or AFFF in the form of a spray, provided that the nozzle is not nearer than 1.8m to any live equipment, irrespective of th e type of water fresh or sea being used. The output from a 9-litre SPEAFFF is regarded as a spray. b.Fire in High Voltage HV Equipment. Due to the energy inherent within a HV g47 system above 1000 V ac or 1500 V dc, high voltage electrical fires will not be g47 extinguished until electrical power has been disconnected. Therefor e, manual injection g47 of CO2 should only be undertaken once power has been disconnected however, fixed g47 CO2 systems may be operated prior to disc onnection. Although electrical disconnection g47 is likely to occur either through the correct operation of the safety protection devices or g47 due to high energy discharge through the fault region resulting in an open circuit, g47 firefighting action must only be taken once disconnection has been confirmed. Water, g47 even in the form of spray or AFFF foam, must not be used for firefighting on live HV g47 equipment. g47 c.Fire Within a Live HV Compartment. Where all HV equipment within the g47 compartment has ingress protec tion IP of IP56 or greater and the integrity of the HV g47 equipment is not endangered by the fire, then manual firefighting is permitted using g47 AFFF, dry powder and CO2 extinguishers or CFHRs. Where any HV equipment within g47 the compartment has an ingress protection of less than IP56, then manual firefighting is g47 limited to CO2 and dry powder extinguishers. For ot her than strictly controlled training g47 serials, lay-flat hoses are not to be deployed and used within any HV compartment where g47 the ingress protection of the HV equipment is less than IP57 submersible until such g47 time that it has been confirme d that power to all HV equipment has been disconnected. g47 Once disconnection has been confirmed, norma l RN firefighting procedures are to be g47 followed. Fixed water and AFFF spray systems may only be operated on live HV g47 equipment in an extreme case and where the ingress protection of all the HV equipment g47 is IP56 and all personnel have been ev acuated from the compartment. Detailed g47 Guidance is given in BR 2000521 - Oper ating Guidance for High Voltage Systems g47 in HM Ships, Submarines and the Royal Fleet Auxiliary. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-22 UK RESTRICTEDd.Fire in Electronic Cabinets. Isolate power if the local switch is accessible, and g47 attack with CO2 through the injection nozzle when fitted, or by opening doorscovers when not. Switch off and remove fuses from all power sources inc luding alternatives to the equipment. If these actions do not extinguish the fire it should be treated as an ordinary fire and attacked with water, obser ving the precautions regarding voltages given above. When the fire has been apparently extinguished, all drawers or sections of complex equipment should be opened to c onfirm that the fire is extinguished. e.Stingray Torpedo Battery Fire. This battery contains amongst other substances g47 magnesium, and the fire is to be fought using copious amounts of water see Annex 21D for fires in air weapons magazines. It is mo st important that the firefighters must wear BA and, should their clothing become conta minated with thallium effluent, it must be thoroughly washed after removal see BR 8680A251. 2162. Explosives and Pyrotechnics g47 Firefighting in magazines and th e behaviour of explosives a nd pyrotechnics is discussed at Annex 21D. The effects of fire on aircra ft armaments and pyrot echnics is covered in Chapter 25. 2163. Fires in Aircraft Hangars g47 Detailed information on aircraft firefighting is contained in Chapter 25. Large aircraft hangars, such as those in a CVS, are divided into sections that can be isolated from each other by closing fireproof curtains. The whole hangar is regarded as an NBCD section. The Hangar Control Position HCP, from which the Hang ar Control Officer HCO supervises safety arrangements and the movement of aircraft in the hangar, is e quipped as an NBCD Section Base and has communications with fuelling positions and HQ1. The fire curtains can be operated from the HCP, inside the hangar on either side of each curtain and in the acce ss lobbies. Each hangar section has one access lobby to por t and starboard. If fire break s out in the hangar, ventilation should be cras h stopped, but it is recommended that the trunking is not closed b ecause, if spraying is started, the sudden dr op in pressure may damage the fire curtains. On the first instance the fire must be attacked w ith 9-litre foam AFFF extinguishers, CO2 if appropriate and, possibly, main foam appliances. As soon as it becomes obvious that the first aid firefighting measures are having no effect, the Command should consider the use of fix installations hangar g47 sprays and Command approval must be authorised prior to their use. Preparation to activate the g47 fixed installation must be made from onset of the fi re and very early action must be taken to drain back any aviation fuel from charged systems. 2164. The danger from composite fibre materials in a fire see Chapter 25 will be compounded g47 in an enclosed area such as a hangar, so early use of breathing apparatus will be essential. After a fire in a hanger, involving composite fibres, great caution mu st be exercised to contain contamination and to establish a safe working environment. Access is to be strictly controlled protective clothing and BA will be necessary un til it can be ascertained that no fibre dust is present. This may require the removal a nd cleaning of all equipment in the hangar. 2165. Floating Oil or Fuel g47 This hazard is sometimes met in harbours and basins. If ign ited it could cause a ship fire. Alternatively, with a ship on fire, floating oil or gasoline in the basin, or discharged from the ship, might result in a ship-to-ship fire. Floa ting burning fuel should be attacked with AFFF, although high flash point fuel can usually be br oken up with water jet a nd then isolated portions cooled and quenched with water spray. A patch of burning fu el can be prevented from spreading by using the wash from ships boats.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-23 Change 32166. Firefighting in a Ch emical Environment g47 The Citadel entry procedures after firefighting in a chemical environment are detailed in BR 21702. The protective clothing for thes e operations is detailed in Chapter 26 of this Volume. The BA procedures, including chan ges between EDBA and NBC respirator, are detailed at Annex 21H. 2167. Before committing firefighters to an incident where contamination is suspected, the g47 following points should be considered to reduc e the risk of contamination to personnel and equipment a. If fixed firefighting systems have been used and all indications are that the fire is extinguished, consider delaying re-entry to allow purging of the compartment to helpdisperse the contaminant. Once re-e ntry by minimum number of personnel has confirmed that the fire is extinguished, wit hdraw firefighters and carry out monitoring and then decontamin ation if required. b. Consider all entryexit routes tofrom compartment, including escape routes. Machinery spaces may, for example, be entered via a pressurised airlock and exited viaescape route to the upper deck. Contaminated personnel can th en re-enter the citadel via normal cleansing stations. Equipment should be weathered for 24 hours before monitoring and cleansing routines to bring it back into service. c. If liquid contamination is suspected, firefighters are to dress in full IPE. This gives minimal heat protection and they must therefore stay behind a waterwall until fire isconfirmed extinguished. d. Always have a relief team standing by, but consider minimising the number of personnel exposed by using only one team for the firefighting effort. The team maybe briefed to consolidate and withdraw to the airlockentry for a rest and cylinder change at a pre-determined BA pressure. 2168. Search and Rescue g47 Search and Rescue operations in a fire environment are de tailed at Annex 21E. 2169. Post Fire Precautions - Fire Sentry g47 In any firefighting situation, a sentry will need to be posted at the scene of the fire after it has been extinguished to report and attack any re-ignition. Initially, the Sentry may be provided by one of the withdrawin g Support Party, if his BA has sufficient air remaining. The requirement for follow-on Fire Sentries are a. To be detailed from the pool of spare personnel, not from the Firefighting Team, who will need rest. b. To be dressed in full firefighting rig and in communication, via FFHBC, with the FCP, the FRPP or HQ1. A BA controller will be required. c. To be provided with a charged hose fitted with a firefighter nozzle, or centre feed hose reel of sufficient length to reach a ll areas of the compartment under surveillance. d. To patrol a number of compartments, if they are on the same deck and it is practicable to do so. If there is requirement to patrol on different decks, then further sentries must be posed.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21-24 UK RESTRICTEDe. To remain closed up until relieved. A sentry will be required until the person in charge of firefighting is satisfied that there is no possibility of re-ignition. 2170. Welding and Burning Sentries g47 Instructions to Welding and Burning Sent ries are contained in BR 200020 - Ship Engineering Practices Safety Considerations and Precautions.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21A-1 Change 1ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 21 RE-ENTRY TECHNIQUES 1. Hose Charging Prior to the following re-entry techniques, which are illustrated in BR 4007, the hoses have to be charged, unless otherwise stated. The Team Leader must ensure that the Hydrant Operatorhas identified which hydrant supplies the Waterwall Operator and which supplies the Firefighter.He can then take up his position with the rest of the team. Both the firefighter and waterwallnozzles are to be shut initially. The T eam Leader then gives the order HYDRANT g47 OPERATOR, ON FIREFIGHTER AT THE HYDRANT. The Hydrant Operator repeats the g47 order, then carries it out. He then informs the Team Leader firefighter on at the hydrant. The g47 Team Leader then gives the order HYDRANT OPERATOR, ON WATERWALL AT THE g47 HYDRANT. The Hydrant Operator repeats the orde r, then carries it out. He then informs the g47 Team Leader WATERWALL ON AT THE HYDRANT. g47 2. Re-entry on the Same Level - Carbonaceous Fire The Waterwall Operator crouches on one knee and positions himself, either in front or to the side of the door, depending on which way the door opens a. If the door opens towards the Team hinges can be seen, then the Waterwall Operator positions himself on the opposite side of the door to the hinges, just to the side of the door so that he will not impede the opening of the door. b. If the door opens away hinges cannot be seen, he then positions himself on the side of the door opposite the hinges, with the nozzle in position against the door frame. 3.The Firefighter remains standing on the hi nge side, at arms length from the door. 4.The Team Leader positions himself behind the Waterwall Operator, and backs him up. The Team Leader then gives the order FIREFIGHTER, ON PERSONAL PROTECTION. The g47 Firefighter operates the nozzle one eighth of a turn to the right to produce a 2 metre flat disc ofwater for personal protection. The Team Leader fi rst ensures that he is backing up the Waterwall Operator, then gives the order ON WATERWALL . The Waterwall Operator rotates the nozzle g47 swiftly through its full range to the left, to pr oduce a 10 metre flat disc of water. If the door g47 opens away from the Team, the Waterwall Operat or now places the nozzle inside the door frame. g47 5.When both the firefighter and waterwall nozzles have been operated, the Team Leader orders the Firefighter to OPEN THE DOOR. g47 a. If the door opens towards the Team, the Firefighter opens the last clip on the door usually in the centre, opposite the hinges, and opens the door to 45 degrees. At the same time, the Waterwall Operator m oves across to place his nozzle in the opening, against the door frame. b. If the door opens away from the Team, then a chain or rope must be secured to the door and held by the Team Leader, to enable him to close the door if necessary. The Firefighter opens the last clip, turns his back and pushe s the door open with his boot. The waterwall, g47 already in position, has sealed the door.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21A-2 UK RESTRICTED6.Once the door is fully open, the Firefighter crouc hes on one knee, adjusts the nozzle a further g47 one eighth of a turn to the right, to a ragged spray, and fights the fire if it can be seen. If the g47 Firefighter cannot see the seat of the fire, he is to direct th e ragged spray towards the deckhead g47 to cool the combustible gasses. g47 7.The Team Leader uses the thermal imaging camera TIC to scan around the compartment, looking for the seat of th e fire, and indicates its pos ition to the Firefighter. When the Team Leader is ready, he orders the Team to STAND UP and ADVANCE into the compartment, g47 cooling and breaking up the fires. The Hydrant Operator now acts as a Hose Handler, helping the Team to move forward. 8. Re-entry on the Same Level - Oil Fire The Team position themselves by the door, as pr eviously described for a carbonaceous fire. The Team Leader positions himself behind the Waterwall Operator, backing him up. 9.After ensuring that the Firefighter is aiming the FB5X away from the fire into safe corner, g47 the Team Leader orders PROVE FOAM. The Firefighter moves the switch on the FB5X to the g47 open position and proves foam, using the finger-tip method. Putting the tip of his firefighting g47 glove into the flow of the foam, then wiping it on the extreme edge of his BA visor. Foam will stick to his visor water will run off. Once th e Firefighter has proved fo am, he moves the switch on the FB5X to the shut position. g47 10.The Team Leader, backing up the Waterwall Operator, orders ON WATERWALL. The g47 Waterwall Operator rotates the nozzle swiftly through its full range to the left, to produce a 10metre flat disc of water. 11.The Team Leader orders the Firefighter to O pen the door as previously described. Once the door is fully open, the Firefighter gets into position, alongside the Team Leader, behind the Waterwall Operator he crouc hes on one knee, always keeping the FB5X pointing away from g47 the fire into a safe corner. The Team Leader orders the Firefighter PROVE FOAM. Once foam g47 has been proved, the Team Leader orders the Firefighter to FIGHT THE FIRE. g47 12.The Team Leader, using the TIC, directs the Firefighter to aim the foam towards the seat of the fire. Once the fire is extinguished, the Team Leader orders the Firefighter OUT FB5X. The g47 Firefighter directs the FB5X into a safe corner, then the Team Leader orders OFF FB5X. The g47 Team Leader confirms that all fires are extinguished, then orders the Waterwall Operator OFF g47 WATERWALL. The Waterwall Operator must ensure that the nozzle is not directed into the g47 compartment while he is adjusting it to the shut position. g47 Note. Consideration should be given to using a Shi p Protector if the Team Waterwall leaves the access route unprotected. The th ree hose technique described in Para 20 may be adapted to achieve this. 13. Re-entry From Above - Carbonaceous Fire The Waterwall Operator and Firefighter each takes up position, crouched on one knee with the hose over the shoulder, one hand on the hose banding behind the coupling, and one hand on the nozzle. The hoses are positioned on the oppos ite side of the hatch to the hinges. UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21A-3 Change 314.The Team Leader remains standing to back up the Waterwall Operator, holding the hose with one hand and backing him up with the othe r. The Team Leader then gives the order FIREFIGHTER, ON PERSONAL PROTECTION. The Firefighter turns the nozzle one eighthof a turn to the right to provide a 2 metre flat disc of personal protec tion waterwall. Then, backing up the Waterwall Operator, the Team Leader orders ON WATERWALL. TheWaterwall Operator turns the nozzle swiftly through its full range to the left, to form a 10 metreflat disc of water for team protection. 15.The Team Leader moves to the end of the hatc h and stands with his back to the hatch. He indicates to the Waterwall Operator and the Firefighter that he intends to open the hatch bothof them acknowledge this. The Team Leader reaches down, takes hold of the hatch and stands up, so that the hatch is at an angle of 45 de grees. The Waterwall Operator and Firefighter immediately position their nozzles w ith the release lugs of the hose couplings resting across the corners inside the hatch coaming. The Team L eader looks over his shoul der to check that both nozzles are in place and then opens the hatch, making sure that the retaining clip secures it in thefully open position. With the hatch fully open, th e Waterwall Operator and Firefighter are now sealing the hatch, preventing the smoke and flame from escaping from the compartment. g47 16.The Team leader orders the Firefighter to lower the firefighter nozzle 2 metres into the compartment. With the nozzle still set to provide a 2 metre flat disc, the Firefighter aggressivelyswings the hose to gain maximum cooling coverage in the compartment. When the Team Leaderis satisfied that adequate cooling has taken place, he orders the Firefighter to raise the nozzle outof the compartment. The firefighter raises the nozzle, assisted by the Hydrant Operator, checksthat it is still set to personal pr otection, and then returns it to th e corner of the hatch coaming to seal the opening. 17.The Team Leader takes over the waterwall from the Waterwall Operator, who makes his way down the ladder until his shoulder is level with the hatch coaming. The Waterwall Operator lifts his arm nearest to the waterwall nozzle and forms a clenched fist. The Team Leader lifts thenozzle from the hatch coaming and positions it unde rneath the arm of the Waterwall Operator, pulling it up so that it is tight under his arm, locking the nozzle in place. The nozzle protects theWaterwall Operator as he descends the ladder. On reaching the bottom of the ladder, the Waterwall Operator turns round, bringing the hose back under the right arm, then reports LADDER CLEAR. 18.The Waterwall Operator moves to a pre-determined position away from the ladder and crouches on one knee. The Firefighter uses the same procedure to des cend the ladder. After reporting LADDER CLEAR, he turns around, grip s the hose under his right arm and moves to a position behind the Waterwall Operator. 19.The Team Leader descends the ladder and pos itions himself behind the Waterwall Operator, alongside the Firefighter. He surveys the compartment, using the TIC, then directs the Firefighterto project a ragged spray towards the fire. If required, the Team Leader gives the order to advance on the fire, keeping control of the Team at all times.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21A-4 UK RESTRICTED20. Re-entry From Above - Oil Fire Three Hose Technique An oil fire re-entry from above, using th e three hose technique, requires a 5-man Support Party the extra man being the Ship Protector. Both the Waterwall Operator and the ShipProtector position themselves, with waterwall nozzles, on the side of the hatch opposite to the hinges. The Firefighter has a FB5X to produce foam to fight the fire. When ready, the TeamLeader orders the Firefighter PROVE FOAM. The Firefighter proves foam as detailed inpara 9 and confirms this to the Team Leader. 21.The Team Leader, while backing up the Waterwall Operator, orders ON WATERWALL, then he backs up the Ship Protector and orde rs ON SHIP PROTECTOR. The Team Leader then opens the hatch, making sure that it is fi rmly clipped open. Both the Waterwall Operator and the Ship Protector seal the hatch with their waterwalls. 22.The Team Leader orders the Firefighter to PROVE FOAM again. When the Firefighter has proved foam, he directs the foam down into th e compartment. After the contents of at least 2 drums of AFFF have been projected into the compartment, the Team Leader orders OFFFB5X. The Firefighter moves the FB5X from the compartment and shuts it by pulling theswitch to the shut position. 23.The Waterwall Operator descends into the co mpartment as described in Para 17. The Firefighter moves onto the ladder until his shoulder is level with the hatc h coaming, raises his arm nearest to the nozzle and makes a clenched fist. The Team Leader lowers the FB5X hose, parallel to the Firefighters body, until the FB5X is at waist height. The Firefighter wraps his arm around the hose and descends into the compartment. 24.The Team Leader follows and takes up position, using the TIC to survey the compartment to find the seat of the fire. He directs the Firefighter away from the fire and orders PROVEFOAM AND FIGHT THE FIRE. When the Firefi ghter has proved foam, he directs foam into the seat of the fire. 25. Re-entry From Above - Oil Fire Fixed Hatch Waterwall This technique allows the use of a 4-man Suppor t Party, yet still protects the ship. The use g47 of FHWW is to be controlled by HQ1 due to the large amount of wate r approximately 10 ton g47 per hour that it can put into a compartment. g47 26.The Team take up positions, with the Waterwall Op erator crouching to the side of the hatch opposite to the hinges, and the Firefighter standi ng. After the Firefighter has proved foam, the Team Leader orders ON WATER AT THE HYDRANT, TO THE FIXED HATCHWATERWALL. The Team Leader backs up the Waterwall Operator and orders ONWATERWALL. The Team Leader opens the hatch to 45 degrees. The Waterwall Operatormoves his nozzle into position inside the hatch coaming. When the Team Leader is satisfied thatthe Team Protection waterwall nozzle is in positi on, he opens the hatch fully, ensuring that the hatch retaining clip is engaged. 27.Once the hatch is fully opened, the Team L eader takes up position on his knees and orders the Waterwall Operator to LOWER YOUR WATERWALL TO JUST BELOW THE FIXEDHATCH WATERWALL. When the waterwall nozzle is in position below the fixed hatchwaterwall, the Team Leader checks that the fixed hatch waterwall is still sealing the hatchopening. If it is, he orders the Waterwall Operator to move his nozzle back to the hatch coaming. The Team then carry on, as described for a 5-man team.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21A-5 Change 128.If the fixed hatch waterwall is not sealing the hatch opening correctly, then a controlled closure of the hatch must be made. The Team Leader orders the Waterwall Operator to move the waterwall nozzle back to the hatch coaming. The Team Leader releases the hatch retaining clip and lowers the hatch to 45 degrees, then orders the Waterwall Operator to remove thewaterwall from within the coaming. Once the waterwall has been removed, the Team Leaderlowers the hatch, backs up the Waterwall Op erator, and orders OFF WATERWALL. When g47 the waterwall nozzle is shut, the Team L eader orders OFF WATER AT THE HYDRANT, TO g47 THE FIXED HATCH WATERWALL. g47 29.A 5-man team, using a ship protector must then be used for re-entry. 30. Re-entry From Below - Oil Based Fire The Hydrant Operator is positioned at the hydrant. The Firefighter stands to one side of the ladder, holding the FB5X in a pistol grip fa shion, right hand on the spill pick up connection, left g47 hand on the ring guard, ensuring that the nozzle is shut. 31.The Waterwall Operator ensures that the waterwall nozzle is fully open, then inserts it in the mounting pole see Chapter 22. The Waterwall Oper ator then waits at the base of the ladder. 32.The Team Leader gives the order HYDRANT OPERATOR, ON FIREFIGHTER AT THE g47 HYDRANT. The Hydrant Operator repeats and then carries out the order. Once he has carried g47 out the order he will inform the Team Lead er FIREFIGHTER ON AT THE HYDRANT. The g47 Team Leader then gives the order FIREFIGHTER PROVE FOAM. The Firefighter then proves g47 foam. Once he has proved foam he shuts off the FB5X. 33.The Waterwall Operator takes up position on the ladder with his nozzle in the mounting pole and positions it to seal the hatch. The Team L eader uses another pole to support the mounting pole. Once the Team Leader has confirmed that the waterwall is in the correct position he givesthe order HYDRANT OPERATOR, ON WATERWALL AT THE HYDRANT. The Hydrant g47 Operator repeats and then carries out the order. Once he has carried out the order, he informs the Team Leader WATERWALL ON AT THE HYDRANT. The Team Leader now opens the g47 hatch. 34.The opening of the hatch is a coordinated effort between the Team Leader and the Waterwall g47 Operator. The Team Leader removes his pole from the mounting pole and pushes open the hatch. Once he has opened the hatch, he returns his pol e to the waterwall mounting pole. The Team Leader then assists the Waterwall Operator in manoeuvring the mounting pole to the hatchcoaming. 35.The Team Leader gives the order FIREF IGHTER, PROVE FOAM and PUT A LAYER g47 OF FOAM IN THE COMPARTMENT ABOVE minimum 2 drums of foam. Once the g47 firefighter has projected the layer of foam, the Team Leader gives the order FIREFIGHTER, g47 OFF FB5X. The Team Leader takes the FB5X from the Firefighter. The Firefighter then climbs g47 the ladder. The Team leader passes up the FB5X to the Firefighter. The Firefighter positions g47 himself behind the waterwall, proves foam in a safe direction away from the seat of the fire and,once he has proved foam, he brings the FB5X round in a sweeping motion and fights the fire. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21A-6 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21B-1 Change 1ANNEX B TO CHAPTER 21 BOUNDARY MONITORING AND COOLING 1. Fire Boundary The fire must be contained within the smalle st possible compass by forming a fire boundary, which is the bulkheads and decks surrounding the compartment or space on fire. The temperature of these bulkheads and decks must be monitored to establish the requirement for cooling with a water spray. 2. Fire Boundary Temperature Monitoring The Temperature Monitoring System TMS is designed for use in Main Machinery Spaces and other high risk compartments to give the Action NBCDO, DCO and OOD the ability to assess conditions within a compartment prior to planning or committing a re-entry team. In anemergency the principles of TMS can be adapted to suit any compartment with a fire, howeverthe inevitable delay in identifying, accessing and establishing suitable monitoring points mayrestrict its overall value and divert effort from the task of extinguishing the fire. 3. Material Preparations for TMS The following are required a.HQ1 Record Sheet . A record sheet copied from the format at Fig 21B-1. This allows HQ1 to record temperatures from up to eight points, transferred from the Recorders cards. By studying temperature trends and peaks, the HQ1 team can predict events and planactions. The information contained on these cards should be retained for any subsequent investigation. b.Recorders Card. These are a 200mm x 125mm to fit plastic JIC wallets card matrix copied from the format at Fig 21B-2. E ach card shows the location of pre-planned temperature monitoring points covering machinery spaces fitted with fixed firefightingsystems and other high risk compartments. Ca rds are to be indexed and tagged together, and a marker pen attached. A blank Recorders card is to be included for the ad-hoc use of TMS g47 for any compartment without pre-planned temper ature monitoring points. The cards are to be retained in HQ1 until required. c.Pre-planned Monitoring Points. These are points on the outside of the perimeter bulkheads, decks and deckheads of the machinery space or high risk compartment beingconsidered, which are suitable for monitoring te mperatures of the space. These are to be identified by Ships Staff taking into account 1 Access to the location, once smoke boundaries are established.2 The thermal conductivity of the bulkhead material allowing accurate measurement of temperature within the compartment . Thermal conductivity through bulkheads g47 protected by fire barrier insulation will be considerably reduced. Monitoring points on g47 these bulkheads should be at positions with a di rect heat path from the other side, eg on g47 metal door frames. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21B-2 UK RESTRICTEDd.Doughnut Signs. Standard doughnut signs, as illu strated at Fig 21B-3 are available from Naval Stores see Volume 3. The bla nk centre of the circle should be cut out to improve conductivity and thus th e recording of true boundary temperature. The line at the bottom of the sign is for identifying the monitoring point. e.Kill Cards. HQ1 and AHQHQ2 copies of Kill Cards for compartments with pre- planned monitoring points are to be annotated to indicate that TMS could be activated if required. f.Temperature Monitoring Devices. These are 1 Magnetic dial thermometers, held in HQ1FRPP lockers, or2 Digital probe kit held in HQ1 of GRP vessels. Note. Difficulty may be experienced with cosmetically lined bulkheads, however, this can be overcome by installing hinged a ccess points in bulkhead linings abutting Main Machinery Spaces and high risk compartments . The identifying doughnut is to be on the hinged door. 4. Personnel Requirements for TMS TMS is administered by the Containment Coordi nator and the rating ic of the Containment Party. To ensure timely imple mentation, one rating should be nominated from the Containment Party to be responsible for recording temperatur es from all the monitoring points. The nominated person should report to HQ1 after each set of r eadings and complete the HQ1 record sheet. 5. TMS Activation TMS is activated when it is established that access into the compartment has been lost, ie Attack BA party beaten back and access closed, fixed firefighting systems have been used or noother means can be used to monitor the internal temperatures in a compartment prior to re-entry. 6. TMS Procedure The procedure for activati on and implementation is a. When activated from HQ1, the nominated TMS rating the Monitor collects the India tagged Recorders Cards for the compartment on fire and the thermometers or probe kitfrom HQ1. The Monitor then proceeds to the locations identified on the Recorders Cardsand affixes the magnetic thermometers or takes a reading with the digital probe. b. When all the magnetic thermometers ar e in place and have ha d time to settle, the Monitor takes a set of readings and records them on the Recorders Card. When all possiblelocations have been covered, the Monitor re turns to HQ1 and transcribes the individual temperatures and the reference time onto the HQ1 Record Sheet, briefing the ANBCDO,DCO or OOD on any specific poi nts noted during the round. c. When all the temperatures have been transcribed from the Recorders Card, it is wiped clean and the reference time for the next set of temperatures written in. Readings should be taken every 15 to 20 minutes depending size a nd complexity of the route. The monitoring cycle is repeated until ordere d to cease by the ANBCDODCOOOD.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21B-3 OriginalDate Sheet of TEMPERATURE MONITORING SYSTEM - HQ1 RECORD SHEET Compartment Fixed Firefighting System Used YesNo Time of First shot Time of Second Shot Time Point Location Temp Temp Temp Temp Temp Temp Temp Temp Temp 1 2345678 Fig 21B-1. Temperature Monitoring System - HQ1 Record SheetBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21B-4 UK RESTRICTEDTEMPERATURE MONITORING SYSTEM RECORDERS CARD Time Point Location Temp 1 2345678 Fig 21B-2. Temperature Monitoring System - Recorders CardUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21B-5 Change 1 7.Care must be taken not to breach estab lished smoke boundaries. Any pre-determined monitoring point that is inaccessible because of a smoke boundary is to have a line drawn through the relevant column on the Recorders Card and a note to that effect marked on theRecord Sheet. 8.Although the Monitor will be entering compar tments where boundary cooling is established he must not be employed on that task. The priority is to attach all thermometers and recordtemperatures. The Monitor may, however, relay messages from the Boundary Cooler to HQ1 andshould take appropr iate action on discovering s econdary fires or casualties. Fig 21B-3. The Doughnut Sign 9. Boundary Cooling g47 The purpose of boundary cooling is to contain a fire within the smallest possible compass by keeping the adjoining decks and bulkheads cool ed with water spray. Boundary cooling must be carefully controlled because indisc riminate spraying can sometimes cause unnecessary damage to electrical equipment, and create adverse conditions of ship stability. If a deck or bulkhead iscool enough to touch, it does not re quire the application of water sp ray. When the use of water does become necessary the amount used must be kept to the absolute minimum required. The Containment Group should make a rrangements for boundary cooling in the very early stages of a fire. The following points will assist in the management of boundary cooling a. Assign a number to each Boundary Cooler note it on the containment incident board with their name and mark on th e board where they are cooling. b. Mark on the containment board the positions of smoke boundaries and the FCP. Ensure HQ1 provides updates as boundaries move. c. Consider the early provision of BA to t hose Boundary Coolers who will be inside a smoke boundary.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21B-6 UK RESTRICTEDd. Brief Boundary Coolers on compartment hazards. e. If re-entry is liable to affect the safety of a Boundary Cooler, the IC of containment must ensure that the IC at the FCP is aware of their positions and make plans for theirremovalsafety. f. Electrical aspects 1 Electrical equipment ideally should be isolated providing such action does not jeopardise the firefighting effort. 2 Where possible whole units, or units w ithin assembly racks are to be removed well clear of the area. 3 Electrical equi pment that cannot be isolated is to be covered with polyamide sheeting and securely taped boundary coolers should then monitor equipment for sign of overheating. 4 Avoid spraying directly onto any electri cal equipment. Spray onto a deckhead or bulkhead and allow water to run down the surface. g. Any obstructions, eg panelling, should be rem oved prior to cooling taking place. It may not be necessary to do so immediately, in which case the panellinginsulation s hould be monitored for signs of blistering paintworkpee lingheat transfer. Ensure tools are available to remove the panellinginsulation. h. Bathrooms, heads, sculleries and galley decks will not readily transfer heat, but brackets welded to the deck, deck drains and pipes passing through the deck will. i. Remove flammable material, such as carpets, stores, bedding, etc from the fire boundary. j. If the structure is cool enough to touch, it does not require cooling. k. The minimum requirement for boundary cooling inside the ship is a CFHRsize 2 hose with a firefighter nozzle. Cloths, mops, extin guishers are unsuitable. Water from the deck can be applied by a bucket, but consideration must be given to how hot the structure is, and the amount of physical effort required. Nozzles should not be in the open position unattended. l. Avoid the build up of free-surface by using the minimum amount of water.m. Ensure Boundary Coolers know how to br eak up free-surface using materials to hand. n. If the fire involves aluminium structure, it is most important that early boundary cooling is applied, as it may collaps e or melt without warning. o. Boundary Coolers should be br iefed to contact HQ1 to repor t when cooling has started.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-1 Change 3ANNEX C TO CHAPTER 21 MACHINERY SPACE FIRES 1. The Hazards Machinery spaces present a high risk of initiation of fire and a great danger that, once started, the fire will develop into a majo r conflagration. Fuel leaks, oil spray or mist from defective joints, and oil-soaked lagging are possible sources of outbreaks. 2. Physical Nature of Machinery Spaces Machinery spaces in warships are usually highly congested, with access generally through hatches. This configura tion itself is a most daunting one to approach, and enter, with a major fire burning below. Movement about the spaces is via catwalks at levels appropriate to the machinery, with short connecting ladders as necessary. Catwalks a nd ladders are generally narrow, making movement of pe rsonnel with firefighting equipment difficult. Catwalks and floorplates are often manufactured in chequered plating which effectively degrades high-levelspray systems and restricts vision a nd attack on the seat of the fire. 3. First Aid Portable Appliances See Chapter 23 These must always be tried first unless the fi re is clearly of such major proportions when discovered that their use would be pointless. Po rtable extinguishers are supplied for the instant reaction and their use will, quite often, knock down appa rently large fires. They will certainly have some effect, not the least of which is to gain time for the firefighting teams to preparethemselves and for fixed inst allations to be made ready. 4. Water and WaterAFFF High Level Spray Systems g47 Some water spray systems have an AFFF fo am spray capability but the AFFF storage tank capacity allows only a limited period of continuous running. The system should be used in the following manner a. AFFF usage should be restricted to 50 per cent tank capacity - either continuous spraying or sporadic bursts. This holds 50 per cent in reserve for possible use at a later stage. b. The decision to spray foam continuously or in burst rests with the ANBCDOOOD. c. There is no need for the compartment to be evacuated before the system is operated, if personnel inside are wearing breat hing apparatus. This type of situation could arise if an attempt to deal with the fire by a firefigh ting team inside the compartment was abandoned and the system was activated while they were vacating. d. The continued use of water spray after foam induction has little effect on the foam blanket already laid. Total sp raying time should be restricted to no more than 10 minutes, it is unlikely that longer spraying will be effective.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-2 UK RESTRICTED5. Gaseous Firefighting Systems These systems which are single or multi-shot Carbon dioxide CO2, Halon 1211 BCF or Halon 1301 BTM are fitted in the main and au xiliary machinery spaces, and their use is authorized by the officer in ch arge of firefighting ANBCDOOOD. Note. There are several types of HALON gas in cluding BCF and BTM. To avoid confusion it is essential that pers onnel are fully aware of the appropriate system and closely follow the respective operating procedure. It is import ant to understand that HALONS have virtually no cooling effect. a. CO2 drench systems require concentration of 35 per cent by volume to extinguish fire and, when the compartment is closed down, all ventilation flaps to it s hould be clipped shut, with the exception of one which has been pre- designated, which is closed but not clipped to prevent excessive build up of pressure when the CO2 gas is released. This atmosphere is lethal if inhaled for even a short period. b. BCF requires only about five per cent concen tration by volume to effectively extinguish most fires. At these concentrations BCF is quite toxic and one-minute exposures will bringabout the onset of first stage anaesthesia, ie a feeling of de tachment and a tingling in the fingers. The compartment should be complete ly closed down all WT doors, hatches and vent flaps being closed and clipped. BC F installations are normally only found on gas turbine or diesel engine modules and in MMPP machinery spaces. The compartment should be purged of fumes before re-entry. c. BTM requires the same concentrations as BCF to be effective but is less toxic and medical tests have proved that people may inhale concentrati ons of up to seven per cent by volume without any risk to health. For si ngle shot systems th e compartment shoul d be completely closed down all WT doors, hatches and vent flaps being closed and clipped. For multi-shot systems the first shot is not to be delayed by compartment isolations orevacuation of personnel. BTM works chemically to stop the combustion process itself. In the process of extinguishing a fire the BTM decomposes to produce highly toxic andcorrosive acids, namely hydrogen fluoride H F and hydrogen bromide HBr. The amount of acids produced is minimized by injecting the required five per cent concentration into thespace in ten seconds or less. Notes 1. In addition to systems being designed so that full discharge is achieved within 10 seconds of initiation to ensure optimum fire suppression, initiation s hould take place as soon as possible and within 5 minutes of fire discover y. In the event that initiation is delayed, the system will still be effective but there will be more breakdown produc ts produced, more fire damage and more subsequent cl ean up required. It is therefore important to initiate compartment drench as early as possible. 2. Where a BTM two-shot system is fitted, the operation of the first shot may be authorized by the MEOOW at sea. This will preclude a delay while waiting for the MEOs permission.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-3 Change 3d. Compartments in which CO2, or BCF is to be used should be vacated and fully closed g47 down before the system is operated. The firs t shot of BTM may be used when vent fans have been stopped but the flaps open and when personnel are still inside the compartment. WARNING ALL PERSONNEL ASSOCIATED WITH FIREFIGHTING SHOULD BE MADE AWARE OF THE POTENTIALLY LETHAL PRODUCTS OF PYROLISED HALON,THE DECOMPOSITION PRODUCTS OF THE FIRE ITSELF AND THE DANGEROF RE-IGNITION FROM INCOMPLETELY CLOSED DOWN COMPARTMENTS.COMPARTMENT EVACUATION FOLLOWING DRENCH IS ESSENTIAL, ELSABEING USED WHEN AVAILABLE. e. Where available, fixed waterfoam sprinkler systems may be used for up to 5 minutes, before re-entry is attempted, in order to cool closed down compartments. This willsignificantly reduce the chance of re-ignition and permit re-entry much earlier after the useof gaseous systems. g47 f. Whenever locally operating a gaseous drench system or checking bottles have g47 discharged within a dedicated HalonCO 2 bottle stowagecompartment, there is a possibility g47 of dangerously high concentra tions of gas in the compartment. Therefore, EDBA is to be g47 worn on air by anyone entering the compartmentstowage. A BA Controller must be g47 nominated. EDBA is also to be worn on ai r whenever investigating gaseous drench system g47 leakagedischarge alarms. g47 g47 g. The diesel generator acoustic enclosures in Type 23 Frigates are not hermetically sealed g47 and there is a risk to personnel entering the machinery space after remo te firing of a module g47 BCF system. BA is therefore to be worn on air, when entering the FAMR after such an g47 incident. g47 6. Bilge Foam Inlet Tubes g47 If these tubes are fitted, they are for early use wh en the fire is known to be in the bilge. Even when the seat of fire may be elsewhere in the machinery space, AFFF introduced through the foam inlet tubes may serve to prevent its spread to the bilge. Foam tube caps should be replaced immediately after use, to preserve compartment integrity. 7. Standard Operating Procedures for Machinery Space BTMBCFC02 Systems g47 a. The guidance given in the following paragraphs is aimed at assisting ANBCDOOOD in dealing with main Machinery Space fires in ships fitted with either 1 CO2BCF - Single and two-shot system. 2 BTM - Single-shot system.3 BTM - Two-shot system.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-4 UK RESTRICTEDb. Due to variations within these systems ships will need to tailor the instructions when compiling individual Aides-Memoire and procedures. Ships fitted with common gasdrenchwater spray pipework are to note the precautions detailed at Note 4 to 9a sub-para 26. c. The procedures are not intended to cover every eventuality. Each Main Machinery Space fire will behave differen tly, however, by understanding the principles, success is more likely. Whilst the chronological order of even ts may vary it is esse ntial that a continuous and aggressive attack is maintained on the fi re. This includes dressing and deploying a Support Party as quickly as possible whilst th e space remains occupied by the First Aid AttackAttack BA Team. The Support Party w ill relieve the Attack Team and continue to deal with the incident. This may mean tackling minor fires or carrying out a compartmentsearch following a successful first operation of the gas drench system. Should the second shot become necessary in vesse ls fitted with a two-shot ga seous system, the Support Party will evacuate the compartment prior to the second shot. d. RFAs are required to follow Maritime and Coastguard Agency MCA rules. The decision to gas drench must therefore comply with these instructions. As RFA vessels areconstructed to commercial standards the use of salt water sprays in Main Machinery Spaces may exacerbate damage rather than reduce it. The decision to water spray thesecompartments must therefore ta ke into account this risk. 8.Ships are to adapt the procedures on the following pages to reflect fixed systems g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-5 Change 3a.CO2BCF Single and Two Shot System Procedure ACTIVITY ACTION 1 Person discovering the fire conducts first aid attack and raises a LOUD VOCAL ALARM including location. Maintain a continuous, aggre ssive attack AttackAttack BASupport Party are to be deploy ed if circumstances permit. Note 1 2 Crash stop ventilation and remake breakers. Stop HP air g47 compressors. Start closing down ventilation flaps and g47 compartment accesses. Check HPSW pressure. Start g47 additional HPSW pumps. g47SCCMCR g47 HQ1VENT g47 3 Has the correct pipe been made and repeated? a Location of fire.b Muster points for i. Attack Party.ii. Support Party.iii. Containment Party.iv. BA Party.HQ1 WK 4 Is the doorhatch open or closed? IC FCP 5 Introduce appropriate quantity of foam to bilge areas via foam tubes and replace foam tube caps.IC FCP 6 Have LAFB and adjacent ships been informed and assistance requested?HQ1 WK QM 7 Start additional generato rs and reconfigure the power distribution system as necessaryDMESR MEOOW 8 Commence system isolations in accordance with the g47 compartment Kill Cards. In vessels fitted with a 2 shot system, g47 closing down is not to delay ope ration of the first shot of CO 2 g47 BCF . Note 2 g47DMESR g47 OOD g47 MEOOW g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-6 UK RESTRICTEDACTIVITY ACTION 9 Establish containment priorities g47 g47 a Adjacent compartments. g47 g47 b Remote any compartments to which the fire could g47 spread by heat transfer through trunking or systems. g47 g47 c Magazines - sprays activated? Confirm weapons g47 and ammunition cook off times. g47 g47 d Establish smoke boundaries and pipe locations. g47 g47 e Are all keys available for adjacent compartments? g47 g47 f Conduct full boundary search. g47OOD g47 ANBCDO g47 IC CONT g47 g47 IC CONT g47 g47g47 DWESR g47 g47g47 IC CONT g47 g47 DUTY SA g47 g47 IC CONT g47 10 Debrief the person finding the fire a What is burning a nd the precise location? b Who is still in the compartment?c Are there any casualties?IC FCPOOD ANBCDO 11 If fire is not extinguished by first aid action a Emergency Clear Lower DeckEmergency Stations.b Account for all personne l - service and civilian. c Control use of spare hands.OODPOOD ANBCDO 12 Pipe SITREP to the ships company. OODANBCDO 13 Continue to close down ventilation flaps - for CO 2 systems, one nominated ventilation flap is closed but left unclipped to relieve excess pre ssure during system operation.IC VENT 14 Attack BASupport Party main tains aggressive attack on fire.IC FCP 15 If fire is major and A ttack BASupport Party are beaten back withdraw firefighters, s eal compartment and confirm all ventilation flaps are shut with exception at sub para 13.ICFCP OODANBCDOUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-7 Change 3ACTIVITY ACTION 16 Authorise operation of gas drench to named compartment. Note 3. Confirm gas cylinders have discharged their contents. BA to be worn. g47OODANBCDO g47 17 Have the LAFB and assistance from adjacent ships arrived?OODANBCDO Assess outstanding tasks a Are all personnel accounted for, is there a need for search and rescue? b Has the Support Party been formed for ships operating a Minimum HFEP system? g47 c Coordinate LAFB and adjacent ships assistance.d Are there sufficient BA, are charging points available? e Is the fire fully contained, smoke boundaries effective and TMS established? f Stability - remove water especially if high in the ship.g47 IC VENT ANBCDO DMESR For operation of single sh ot gas systems continue to para 25. 18 Monitor the compartment temperature in accordance with sub para 27.IC CONT 19 Is the fire considered EXTINGUISHED? - NO - go to para 23.OODANBCDO 20 Is the fire considered EXTINGUISHED? - YES. Clip remaining flap CO 2 system only, operate waterAFFF sprays and monitor temperature sub paras 26-28 refers. Crashstop ventilation carry out re-entry procedure using 3 hosefixedhatch waterwa ll technique.IC FCP VENTOODANBCDO 21 Is the fire confirmed EXTINGUISHED by the re-entry team? - YES. Re-entry Team to cool down the scene of the fire and place sentry. Carry out smoke clearance.IC FCP OODANBCDOBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-8 UK RESTRICTEDACTIVITY ACTION 22 Is the fire confirmed EXTINGUISHED by the re-entry team? - NO? Re-entry Team attack the fireg47 23 If Re-entry Team are beaten back, or if the fire is not considered to be extinguished sub para 19, re-seal the compartment for CO2 system unclip nominated ventilation flap.IC FCP OODANBCDOVENT 24 When compartment conf irmed closed down, verified against compartment Kill Cards - authorise second operation of gas drench to named compartment. Note 2OODANBCDO 25 Allow 5 minutes to elapse for BCF chemicalsCO 2 to extinguish the fire. Re-clip nominated ventilation flap CO2 systems only.OODANBCDO 26 After 5 minutes order Ope rate high level waterAFFF sprays. Spray compartment for 5 minutes to effect cooling. Notes 4 and 5OODANBCDO 27 Monitor bulkhead temperatures using magnetic thermometers. Prior to making a re-entry confirm a Three successive temperat ure drops have occurred, and b Compartment temperature is below 100 degrees Celsius. Notes 5 and 6IC CONT 28 Consideration should be gi ven to using the high level waterAFFF sprays for a further 5 minutes to cool thecompartment before attempting to make a re-entryOODANBCDO 29 Crash stop ventilation and authorise a re-entry using 3 hosefixed hatch wa terwall technique.OODANBCDO 30 Extinguish any remaining fire and secure the compartment.IC FCP 31 FIRE EXTINGUISHED! Post sentry, carry out smoke clearance and remove water.IC FCP OODANBCDO 32 Retain all information whic h may be required for post fire investigation Fire Report AlphaBravo.OODANBCDO Notes 1. For ships operating a Minimum HFEP system the forming of the Support Party from the g47 spare hands is to receive high priority.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-9 Change 32. Isolations for each space are to be iden tified on the Kill Card as Primary or Secondary. Primary Isolations are to include all fuel, air, lub oil, 440V and HV systems in the compartment. In most cases it should be possible to make Prim ary Isolations within 10 minutes but Secondary Isolations may take up to 30 minutes to complete . The making of isolations, giving priority to the Primary Isolations, should commence as soon as the alarm is raised, however their completion should not delay use of the first shot of the gas drench system. In vessels fitted with a 2 shot system all Primary Isolations should whenever possible be completed beforeauthorization of the second shot. In 1 and 2 s hot systems all Primary and Secondary Isolations should whenever possible be completed before authorizing a re-entry to the compartment concerned. If for any reason isolations cannot be achieved the OIC must make a risk management decision when to authorize operation of the gas drench system or make a re-entry. 3. Confirm all personnel have been evacuated from the compartment. On the order Operate CO 2BCF Gas Drench, Cabinet doors are to be ope ned as a co-ordinated action in the process of operating the gas drench. No more than 60 seconds is to elapse from opening doors to operating the gas drench system. 4. In ships fitted with common pipework for gas drench and waterAFFF sprays there is a risk that the cooling effect of the expanding gas will cause water trapped in the pipework to freeze. If a sequence of GasWater AFFFGas is used, a second operation of the gas system may freeze any remaining water and prevent a successf ul second gas drench. The risk is greatly reduced if a GasGasWater AFFF sequence is used. 5. High level spraying quickly reduces compartment temperatures and minimises heat damage. Most high level spray systems are fitte d with non-aspirating nozzles - foam is NOT produced when AFFF and water is used. Water sp ray with AFFF greatly improves the cooling effect by reducing the surface tension of the water thereby increasing the wetted area. Water only spraying does not adversely affect b ilge foam introduced through the foam tubes. Excessive spraying of any description will increase equipment damage. 6. Positioning of spray heads varies, theref ore spraying will not necessarily cool the machinery space deckhead. Deckhead temper atures may therefore remain high due to latenttrapped heat.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-10 UK RESTRICTEDb. BTM - Single Shot System Procedure ACTIVITY ACTION 1 Person discovering the fire conducts first aid attack and raises a LOUD VOCAL ALARM including location. Maintain a continuous, aggressi ve attack AttackAttack BA Support Party are to be deploy ed if circumstances permit. Note 1 2 Crash stop ventilation and remake breakers. Stop HP air g47 compressors. Start closing down ventilation flaps and g47 compartment accesses. Check HPSW pressure. Start g47 additional HPSW pumps. g47SCC g47 MCR g47 VENT g47 3 Has the correct pipe been made and repeated? a Location of fire.b Muster points for i. Attack Party.ii. Support Party.iii. Containment Party.iv. BA Party.HQ1 WK 4 Is the doorhatch open or closed? IC FCP 5 Introduce appropriate quantity of foam to bilge areas via foam tubes and replace foam tube caps.IC FCP 6 Have LAFB and adjacent ships been informed and assistance requested?HQ1 QM 7 Start additional generato rs and reconfigure the power distribution system as necessary.DMESR MEOOW 8 Commence system isolations in accordance with the g47 compartment Kill Cards. Note 2 g47DMESR g47 MEOOW g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-11 Change 3ACTIVITY ACTION 9 Establish containment priorities a Adjacent compartments. b Remote any compartment to which the fire could spread by heat transfer through trunking or systems. c Magazines - sprays activated? Confirm weapon and ammunition cook off times. d Establish smoke boundaries and pipe locations.e Are all keys available for adjacent compartments?f Conduct full boundary search.OOD ANBCDO IC CONTIC CONT DWESRIC CONT SAIC CONT 10 Debrief the person finding the fire a What is burning a nd the precise location? b Who is still in the compartment?c Are there any casualties?IC FCP OODANBCDO 11 If fire is not extinguished by first aid action a Emergency Clear Lower DeckEmergency Stations.b Account for all personne l - service and civilian. c Control use of spare hands.OOD ANBCDO 12 Pipe SITREP to the ships company. 13 Continue to close down ventilation flapsOOD ANBCDOVENT 14 Attack BASupport Party main tains aggressive attack on fire.IC FCP 15 If fire is major and A ttack BASupport Party are beaten back withdraw firefighters, s eal compartment and confirm all ventilation flaps are shut.IC FCP 16 Authorise operation of gas drench to named compartment. Confirm gas cylinders have discha rged their contents. BA to be worn. Note 3. g47OOD ANBCDO g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-12 UK RESTRICTEDACTIVITY ACTION 17 have the LAFB and assistance from adjacent ships arrived? Assess outstanding tasks a Are all personnel accounted for, is there a need for search and rescue? b Has the Support Party been formed for ships operating a Minimum HFEP system? g47 c Coordinate LAFB and adjacent ships assistance.d Is there sufficient BA, are charging points available? e Is the fire fully contained, smoke boundaries effective and TMS established? f Stability - remove water especially if high in the ship.OOD ANBCDO g47 IC CONT DMESR ANBCDO 18 Allow at least 5 minutes for BTM to chemically extinguish the fire.OOD ANBCDO 19 After 5 minutes order Ope rate high level waterAFFF sprays. Spray compartment for 5 minutes to effect cooling. Note 4.OOD ANBCDO 20 Monitor bulkhead temperatures using magnetic thermometers. Prior to making a re-entry confirm a Three successive temperat ure drops have occurred, and b Compartment temperature is below 100 degrees Celsius. Notes 4 and 5.IC CONT 21 Consideration should be gi ven to using the high level waterAFFF sprays for a further 5 minutes to cool thecompartment before attempting to make a re-entry.OOD ANBCDO 22 Crash stop ventilation and authorise a re-entry using the 3 hosefixed hatch wa terwall technique.OOD ANBCDO 23 Extinguish any remaining fire and secure the compartment.IC FCPUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-13 Change 3ACTIVITY ACTION 24 FIRE EXTINGUISHED! Post sentry, carry out smoke clearance and remove water.IC FCP OODANBCDO 25 Retain all information wh ich may be required for post fire investigation F ire Report AlphaBravo.OOD ANBCDO Notes 1. For ships operating a Minimum HFEP system, the forming of the Support Party from the g47 spare hands must receive high priority. 2. Isolations for each space are to be iden tified on the Kill Card as Primary or Secondary. Primary Isolations are to include all fuel, air, lub oil, 440V and HV systems in the compartment. In most cases it should be possible to make Prim ary Isolations within 10 minutes but Secondary Isolation may take up to 30 minutes to complete. The making of isolations, giving priority to the Primary Isolations, should commence as soon as the alarm is raised however their completion should not delay use of the gas drench system . All Primary and Sec ondary Isolations should whenever possible be completed before authorizing a re-entry to the compartment concerned.If for any reason isolations cannot be achieved the OIC must make a risk management decision when to authorize a re-entry. 3. Confirm all personnel have been evacuated from the compartment. On the order Operate CO 2BCF Gas Drench, Cabinet doors are to be ope ned as a coordinated action in the process of operating the gas drench. No more than 60 seconds is to elapse from opening doors to operating the gas drench system. 4. High level spraying quickly reduces compartment temperatures and minimises heat damage. Most high spray systems are fitted with non-aspirating nozzles - foam is NOT produced when AFFF and water is used. Water spray with AFFF greatly improves the cooling effect by reducing the surface tension of the water, th ereby increasing the wetted area. Water only spraying does not adversely affect bilge foam introduced through the foam tubers. Excessive spraying of any description will increase equipment damage. 5. Positioning of spray heads varies, therefore spraying will not necessarily cool the machinery space deckhead. Deckhead temper atures may therefore remain high due to latenttrapped heat.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-14 UK RESTRICTEDc. BTM - Two Shot Systems Procedure ACTIVITY ACTION 1 Person discovering the fire conducts first aid attack and raises a LOUD VOCAL ALARM including location. Maintain a continuous, aggressi ve attack AttackAttack BA Support Party are to be deploy ed if circumstances permit. Note 1 2 Crash stop ventilation and remake breakers. Stop HP air compressors. Start closing down ventilation flaps andcompartment accesses. Check HPSW pressure. Startadditional HPSW pumps.SCCMCR VENT 3 Has the correct pipe been made and repeated? a Location of fire.b Muster points for i. Attack Party.ii. Support Party.iii. Containment Party.iv. BA Party.HQ1 WK 4 Is the doorhatch open or closed? IC FCP 5 If the fire is not extinguishe d by first aid action authorise operation of gas drench to na med compartment. Personnel not wearing BA are to withdraw from the space at the firstopportunity, using ELSA if re quired. The first operation of BTM must not be delayed becau se personnel are not wearing respirator protection in the affected space. Note 2. Confirmgas cylinders have discharged their contents. BA to beavailable.OOD ANBCDOMEOOW 6 Pipe SITREP over the main broadcast, including location of FCP.OODANBCDOUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-15 Change 3ACTIVITY ACTION 7 If fire is not extinguished by first aid action a Emergency Clear Lower DeckEmergency Stations.b Account for all personne l - service and civilian. c Control use of spare hands.OODANBCDO 8 Introduce appropriate quantity of foam to bilge areas via foam tubes and replace foam tube caps.IC FCP 9 Have LAFB and adjacent ships been informed and assistance requested?HQ1 QM 10 Start additional generators and re-configure the power distribution system as necessary.DMESR MEOOW 11 Commence system isolations in accordance with the compartment Kill Cards. Closing down is not to delayoperation of the first shot of BTM. Note 3.DMESR OODMEOOW 12 Establish containment priorities a Adjacent compartments. b Remote any compartment to which the fire could spread by heat transfer through trunking or systems. c Magazines - sprays activated? Confirm weapon and ammunition cook off times. d Establish smoke boundaries and pipe locations.e Are all keys available for adjacent compartments?f Conduct full boundary search.OOD ANBCDO IC CONTIC CONT DWESRIC CONT SAIC CONT 13 Debrief the person finding the fire a What is burning a nd the precise location? b Who is still in the compartment?c Are there any casualties?IC FCP OODANBCDOBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-16 UK RESTRICTEDACTIVITY ACTION 14 Continue to close down doors and hatches with the exception of one hatch to allow es caperescue of firefighters. A hatch waterwall at the nomin ated hatch is advisable if manpower permits to prevent the escape of smokeheatBTM. The rigging of this waterwall must not delay the early use of the first operation of the BTM system.IC FCP OODANBCDO 15 Personnel fighting the fire will confirm if the fire has been extinguished.IC FCP 16 Pipe SITREP over ma in broadcast. OODANBCDO 17 Account for all non BA wearers. 18 Have the LAFB and assistance from adjacent ships arrived? Assess outstanding tasksODDANBCDO OODANBCDO a Are all personnel accounted for - is there a need for search and rescue? b Has the Support party been formed for ships operating a Minimum HFEP system? g47 c Coordinate the LAFB and assistance from adjacent ships. d Are firefighters in need of reliefs? see 2660, Table 26-1. e Is the fire fully contained, smoke boundaries effective and TMS established?IC CONT f Stability - remove water especially if high in the ship.DMESR ANBCDO 19 Is the fire considered EXTINGUISHED - YES? Attack BASupport Party cool down scene of the fire and place sentry. Carry out smoke clearance.IC FCP 20 Is the fire considered EXTINGUISHED? - NO. Attack PartySupport Party continue to attack the fire.IC FCPUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-17 Change 3ACTIVITY ACTION 21 Prepare for second operation of gas drench system a Are all ventilation flaps confirmed shut and Primary Isolations completed where practicable? Note 3 b Have the Attack Party Support Party been beaten back? c Withdraw firefighters, ensuring that the compartment is closed down. d Authorise second operation of gas drench to named compartment.OODANBCDO VENT OODANBCDO IC FCP IC FCPOODANBCDO 22 Allow at least 5 minutes for BTM to chemically extinguish the fire.OODANBCDO 23 After 5 minutes order Ope rate high level waterAFFF Sprays. Spray compartment to e ffect cooling. Notes 4 and 5OODANBCDO 24 Monitor bulkhead temperatures using magnetic thermometers. Prior to making a re-entry confirm a Three successive temperat ure drops have occurred, and b Compartment temperature is below 100 degrees Celsius. Note 5IC CONT 25 Consideration should be gi ven to using the high level waterAFFF sprays for a further 5 minutes to cool thecompartment before making a re-entryOODANBCDO 26 Crash stop ventilation and authorise a re-entry using the 3 hosefixed hatch wa terwall techniqueOODANBCDO 27 Extinguish any remaining fire and secure the compartmentIC FCP 28 FIRE EXTINGUISHED! Post sentry, carry out smoke clearance and remove water.OODANBCDO IC FCP 29 Retain all information whic h may be required for the post fire investigation F ire Report AlphaBravo.OOD ANBCDOBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21C-18 UK RESTRICTEDNotes 1. For ships operating a Minimum HFEP system, the forming of the Support Party from the g47 spare hands is to receive high priority. 2. The Attack Party fighting the fire without BA ar e at risk from the to xic effects of smoke. The BTM introduced into the space is between 5-7 concentration and is not in itself toxic. However, when BTM is in contact with extremely hot surfaces this will add to the toxicity of the smoke. Firefighters without BA are therefore to evacuate the s pace as soon as the BTM drench alarm sounds. BTM drench cabinet doors are to be opened as a coordinated action in the process of operating the gas drench. No more than 60 seconds is to elapse from opening doors to operating the gas drench system. 3. Isolations for each space are to be iden tified on the Kill Card as Primary or Secondary. Primary Isolations are to include all fuel, air, lub oil, 440V and HV systems in the compartment. In most cases it should be possible to make Prim ary Isolations within 10 minutes but Secondary Isolations may take up to 30 minutes to complete . The making of isolations, giving priority to the Primary Isolations, should commence as soon as the alarm is raised, however their completion should not delay use of the first shot of the gas drench system. All Primary Isolations should whenever possible be completed before aut horization of the second shot. All Primary and Secondary Isolations should when ever possible be completed befo re authorizing a re-entry to the compartment concerned. If for any reason is olations cannot be achieved the OIC must make a risk management decision when to authorize opera tion of the gas drench system or make a re- entry. 4. High level spraying quickly reduces com partment temperatures and minimises heat damage. Most high level spray systems are fitte d with non-aspirating nozzles - foam is not produced when AFFF and water is used Water spray with AFFF greatly improves the coolingeffect by reducing the surface tension of the wa ter, thereby increasing the wetted area. Water only spraying does not adversely affect b ilge foam introduced through the foam tubes. Excessive spraying of any description will increase equipment damage. 5. Positioning of spray heads varies, therefore spraying will not necessarily cool the machinery space deckhead. Deckhead temper atures may therefore remain high due to latenttrapped heat.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21D-1 Change 1ANNEX D TO CHAPTER 21 EXPLOSIVES AND PYROTECHNICS 1. Definitions A magazine is defined as a compartment or locker specially designed to be safe for the permanent or temporary stowage of explosives or explosive st ores, ie all weapons, missiles or stores containing substances us ed to produce an explosive, in cendiary or pyrotechnic effect. 2. Firefighting A small fire in a magazine should be first t ackled with the 9-litre foam AFFF extinguisher provided. A fire which has pr ogressed beyond the use of porta ble equipment will normally be dealt with by the activation of a fitted spray system. Some spray systems are manually operated,but in most ships they are automatically operated at a specific rise in temperature quartzoid bulbsee Chapter 22. Flooding arrangements, as f itted to some magazine, RU magazine and pyrotechnic lockers are manually operated. 3. Floods and Sprays With a manual system, the decision whether to spray andor flood a ma gazine must be made in good time. The responsibility to do so rest s with the Action NBCD Officer or OOD who, if time permits, must consult the Command. In cases of extreme emergency, the decision must be made by the officersenior rating of the appropriate Fire and Repair Party or, in the case of RU magazines or lockers on the weather deck, by the o fficer or senior rating closed up in the vicinity. The Action NBCDO or OOD shoul d be informed immediately. 4. Adjacent Compartments To meet the hazard of fire in a compartment adjacent to a magazine, the bulkheaddeckdeckhead of the magazine should be sprayed with water boundary cooled from within the magazine, using either a firefighter nozzle supplied with water from the nearesthydrant or CFHR by running a hose through th e door or hatch. The decision to boundary cool rests with the officersenior rating in charge of the firefighting team or, in extreme emergency,with the officersenior rating who may be stationed in the magazine. 5. Air Weapons Magazines If the air weapons magazine smoke alarm activ ates and if torpedoes are carried, the OOQ g47 is to inhibit the sprays or, if the sprays are already activated, isolate the HPSW supply. Using both indicator test plug and fish eye viewer, he is to attempt to ascertain the situation in themagazine a. If it can be seen that the cause of the smoke alarm is a non self sustaining torpedo battery fire, the sprays are not to be re-activated. Once all battery activity has ceased and thesmoke has been cleared, a controlle d re-entry into the magazine is to be made by the Support Party, backed up by the WE Hazard Team. b. If the cause of the smoke alarm is confirmed as a self sustaining battery fire, a major magazine fire, or if there is any doubt, the sprays should be activated andor the HPSW supply de-isolated. The magazine should th en be sprayed for a minimum period of 30 minutes. On completion, provi ded all battery ac tivity has ceased and other fires are extinguished, a full re-entry is to be made by the Support Party, backed up by the WE Hazard Team.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21D-2 UK RESTRICTED6.If no Stingray warshot torpedoes are held in the magazine, the policy for spraying remains the same as for any other magazine. 7. Boundary Cooling If boundary cooling is being carried out in a magazine fitted with an automatic quartzoid bulb spray system and a high proportion of the spray heads are suddenly activated, the persons carrying out the boundary cooling, unless wear ing breathing apparatus, should vacate the magazine immediately, as it is considered that the volume of fine spray water will make thecompartment uninhabitable. 8. Regulations The regulations applying in each ship should be contained in Ships General Orders SGOs. g47 9. Incendiary Weapons These are generally thermite, or a similar substance, in a magnesium alloy casing. The filling produces its own oxygen and, once ignite d, cannot be extinguished. While it is burning the outer case ignites and generally explodes, so that pieces of burning magnesium alloy can bethrown a distance of up to 15 metres. These w eapons should be cooled with large quantities of water spray. Burning magnesium should be att acked with large quantities of water. Water on burning magnesium causes intense reaction and increases the burning rate, so vast quantitiesmust be used. CO 2 should not be used because it increas es the burning rate without producing any cooling effect. Firefighters must make full use of any available protective cover whentackling this type of fire. 10. Ammunition with Phosphorus Content Phosphorus is air-reactive and, when on fire, s hould be f ought with copious amounts of water. At about 250C, encased white phosphorus changes its chemical form, with the resultant considerable release of heat , and is likely to explode. 11. Depleted Uranium Ammunition DUA Fires involving DUA, in magazi nes, lockers or elsewhere, should be fought by personnel wearing BA, using copious amounts of water. Should uranium oxide aerosol be present precautions need to be taken with respect to the control of ventilation to prevent its spread and with the movement of personnel to prevent exposure. Care should be taken to ensure that the fire is completely extinguished and that the remaining ashes are cold and thoroughly soaked withwater. It is recommended that all ashes and solid debris from su ch a fire should be collected up and disposed overboard, using copious amounts of water where necessary. 12. Risk Reduction Measures. The need for rapid and efficient firefighting is vital. The risk g47 of explosion makes it necessary for the firefighters to wear protective helmets if available andto protect themselves as much as possible by shielding behind any structure or fitting which maybe close to their required firefi ghting position. The possible loss of all or part of the firefighting team and their equipment as the result of an ex plosion must be consid ered, and back-up crews and their equipment must be available in a su itably sheltered position. Ships Orders are to contain suitable plans for dealing with this s ituation. The requirement to ditch weapons, or loaded or crashed aircraft, must also form part of the contingency plan and detailed regulations are contained in BR 862, Naval Ma gazine and Explosive Regulati ons, Vol 1. Ditching must be considered immediately it is known that a fire invol ving explosives has de veloped it may be the only way to avert a major disaster. Regular fire exercises are to be arranged so that shipscompanies are thoroughly conversant with the requirements of these Orders.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21D-3 Change 113.The chance of explosives becomin g involved in a fuel fire is greatest when the explosive is out of its normal stowage, for instance, on a flight deck. Every precaution must be taken, everyorder implicitly obeyed. The danger from explosives on flight decks arises from either thoseloaded on aircraft or from those held in weapon parks. BR 862, should be consulted for detailed regulations for handling and care of air weapons. The amount of explosive stores on flight decks must be carefully controlled and should never exceed that re quired for immediate operational requirements. Consideration shoul d be given to the methods to be employed and the routes by which explosives can be ditched. 14. Cooking Off The time factor for ammunition to cook off i e premature explosion due to excessive heat in a fire situation depends on ma ny variables, eg the nature of the explosive and the propellant, the thickness of the case, the temperature of the fire and the proximity of the explosive to thesource of heat. BR 862 sets out in tabular form the hazard times and risk times of weapons when they are involved in fire, and officers who may be responsible for such firefighting operations are to familiarize themselves with the relevant articles. 15.When the flames surrounding a weapon have b een extinguished, the internal temperature of the weapon may continue to rise and cause cook off some consider able time later. The cooling of weapons exposed to fire must continue for at least thirty minut es after the fire is extinguished. 16.If a weapon is in danger of cooking off the in itial aim must be to se parate other explosive stores in the following sequence a. Remove all explosives to a distance of at least 12 metres.b. Following that, remove all explosives in fi re divisions 1 and 2 to at least 18 metres. c. Following that, remove all explosives in fire division 1 to at least 36 metres. If circumstances permit, a, b a nd c should be carried out concurrently. Explosives within these radii which cannot be m oved must be cooled. 17. Weapons and Pyrotechnics on Aircraft g47 Chapter 25 gives guidance on the effect of fire on weapons and pyrotechnics associated with g47 embarked aircraft. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21D-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21E-1 Change 3ANNEX E TO CHAPTER 21 SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATIONS 1. Implementing Search and Rescue SAR Operations If personnel are known, or suspected of being in the smoke logged area and there is a high possibility that they are overcome or trapped, the person in charge of the incident must decideon whether a SAR operation is prac ticable. This should only be c onsidered when all fires are under control or confirmed extingu ished. This will then make av ailable all SAR equipment and manpower. A SAR operation will take up all the resources of the HFEP or SSEP if it is to be carried out safely. 2.The decision is taken by HQ1SCC, so the IC Main Group should inform HQ1SCC as soon as it is clear a SAR operation may be necessary, Support Team overdue. When SAR operation is required, HQ1SCC should immediately start to muster all equipment and prepare the teams. 3.It is always of benefit, if possible, to use personnel with knowledge of the area or compartment to make up the SAR teams. Thes e personnel should at least be questioned for useful information on the area or compartment. 4.Consideration should be given to a. Location of area where personnel we re last seen or known to be. b. Detailslocations of casualties if known. c. Dangerous areas, eg positions where guardrails, ladders or decks etc are missing in way of work or damage. d. Difficult search areas and trap points under machinery and small compartments. e. Little-used exit points such as emergency exits, escape hatches etc. 5.Once members of the Ships Company are be lieved to be missing, all hands should be mustered so that a target num ber can be obtained for the SAR. 6.If a SAR operation is carried out during ai d to another ship, passenger lists and crew check-off lists should be used. 7. Safety Precautions The safety of the SAR teams is as important as the efforts to rescue trapped personnel. The person in charge of the incident should be guided by the following a. Make sure teams are well briefed on how to search a compartment and lay a guideline.b. Make sure teams know how to use SAR e quipment, especially breathing apparatus. c. Have the area to be searched clearly defined and a clear route for the guideline to be laid if possible.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21E-2 UK RESTRICTED d. Always work in teams of at least two. 8. Equipment The following equipment is available for SAR teams a. A 40 metre guideline in a pouch see Fig 21E-1. The standing end is knotted to prevent it from being pulled out of the pouch. Four guidelines are supplied to each FRPP and UDRFPP. BA lockers containing guidlines are to be identified by a tally GUIDELINEWITHIN applied beneath the EDBA tally. b. A personal line with a knurled spring clip 8 per FRPP and UDRFPP. The spliced eye g47 of the line is attached to the waist band of the EDBA harness. When the EDBA is not beingused for SAR, the personal lines are to be stowed in FRPP lockers. c. Breathing apparatus EDBA.d. FFHBC for the search team and a ha nd-held radio for the IC at the FCP. e. A 2 metre BA extension hose and rescue mask.f. A 15 metre BA extension hose.g. Lightweight stretcher.h. ELSA, as escape BA for casualties.i. Thermal imaging camera TIC. g47 Fig 21E-1. Guide Line Indicator Route LineUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21E-3 Change 19. SAR Technique The search should begin at the n earest point to the scene of th e incident and then work away from it towards fresh air and safety. This ensu res that if a casualty is found before the team reaches the limit of their e ndurance they are as near to fresh air as possible. To this end, priority is given to a 2 man Pathfinder team who can lay the guideline to the scene of the incident SOTI. 10.Pathfinders enter the smoke boundary making sure that the guideline is secured at the entry point, in fresh air, to a secure fitting. One ELSA is to be carried by each member of the team to help sustain any casualties found. A 2m BA extens ion hose is to be carried by one member of the team, ideally No 2. 11.The guideline should be laid by the most direct route, if possible at waist height, always to secure fittings. This will allow search teams to follow with ease. The guideline should, where possible, be laid above doorways to leave access for later search teams and indicate that the compartment has not yet been searched. 12.When the Pathfinders arrive at the SOTI the guideline should be secured to a fixed position. 13.When any team has been committed, a rescue t eam should always be ready, standing by, with all pre-wear checks done. 14.Once the guideline has been laid, SAR teams can be committed after being given a full brief on what areas they are to search, and search technique boundary, quarter , diagonal. The SAR teams must clip onto the guideline in fresh air, at the entry point, with the knurled side of thepersonal line spring clip pointing towards the entryexit point. 15.The search team should always follow the guideline to the sear ch area. At the search point one member of the team remains on the guideline at all times to act as a datum for the search.At no time should both members of the team unhook themselves from the guideline. 16.The Team Leader should moni tor air gauges and make a decision on when a return is necessary dependant on conditions , but the return should always take place by the time the BA whistle sounds. 17.Any moveable casualties should be sustained us ing the 2m BA extension and rescue mask g47 or ELSA. g47 18.The benefits of the ELSA should always be taken into account, as th e rescue mask greatly g47 reduces the duration of the BA. Any casualtie s should be removed as soon as discovered, if possible. The 15m extension can be called for a nd used if a casualty is trapped or requires the lightweight stretcher. 19.In a smoke-logged compartment, casualties will be in immediate need of an air supply. The SAR team must supply this with ELSA or BA extension, keeping their own air supply for themselves. 20.If a lightweight stretcher is to be used, a f our-man team should be considered. First aid should be given only when it is safe to do so.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21E-4 UK RESTRICTED21. Locating Missing Personnel Personnel trapped by smoke or fire often retreat into unexpected places to protect themselves, so all areas of compartments must be methodically searche d. Possible hiding places are a. In or behind bunks.b. In or behind lockers.c. Under tables or chairs.d. Adjacent to compartment exits.e. In bilges or under deck plates. 22.Casualties who are conscious will probably be suffering from shock and may present a danger to the search team. Teams must be prepared to restrain casualties and keep their own airsupplies out of reach. 23. Dead Bodies Bodies must not be moved until so directed by the officer in charge of the SAR. Whenever possible, dead bodies should be photographed in sit u, or a sketch of the location made, to assist in the subsequent investigation or inquiry. Personnel must wear imper meable gloves eg NBC outer gloves when moving bodies, to pr otect against bacter iological infection. 24. Precautions when Searching a. When negotiating a hatch and ladder 1 Ensure that the hatch retaining clip is secure.2 Test rungstreads before committing full weight.3 Feel below for the next rungtread. Never assume that deck level has been reached. 4 Never jump from a ladder to a deck.5 One searcher at a time on a ladder, the other stood clear. 6 Use the clear ladder drill. b. When passing through a doorway or access 1 Enter cautiously, as the door could lead to a ladder, a tr unk or shaf t, or an unsafedamaged deck. 2 If the access is restricted, do not remove BA.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21E-5 Change 13 Ensure that there is sufficient room to turn around. c. When moving through the ship 1 Tread gently and cautiously before committing weight to the lead foot, shuffle, rather than walk. 2 Never put weight on guardrails.3 Avoid touching metal items with bare hands as they may be hot from fire or electrically live. 4 Continually test the area ahead by m oving a hand ahead, with the palm towards the face. 25. Action if a Searcher Becomes Trapped If a searcher becomes lost or trapped, he should sound his personal bul b horn or bang metal g47 against metal. Both are recognised distress sign als. Shouting should be avoided, as it wastes BA air and is not as effective as mechanically produced sound. 26. SAR Control at the Entry Point The IC of the Main Group will normally c ontrol SAR teams and is to keep HQ1SCC g47 informed of progress. The IC is also to g47 a. Establish a casualty handling area.b. Ensure proper BA control.c. Arrange for a Rescue Team to stand-by, with BA pre-wear checks completed. g47 d. Arrange for 15m BA extension equi pment to be laid out and proved. 27. After Compartment Search When a compartment has been searched and is believed to be clear, th e door or hatch is to be closed to protect watertig ht integrity. A green cyalume light should be attached to a doorhatch clip to indicate a s earched and clear compartment.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21E-6 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21F-1 Change 1ANNEX F TO CHAPTER 21 SMOKE ALARM - REACTION GUIDANCE 1.While it is impossible to provide rigid routin es due to differing circumstances, number of zones sounding, locations, sighted smoke, h eat etc the guidance in Fig 21F-1 should be reflected in ships NBCD Orders, adapted as necessary to suit the fitted smoke alarm systems. Smoke alarm activated HQ1 accept and silence alarm see Note. Broadcast SMOKE ALARM, SMOKE ALARM, SMOKE ALARM,SMOKE ALARM IN ............................................... compartmentzone,ATTACK PARTY INVESTIGATE.Monitor compartment CCTV, if fitted. Attack Party muster at the scene of the alarm. Determine if compartment is open or closed.Report to HQ1. COMPARTMENT OPENHQ1 attempt to resetalarmsee NoteCOMPARTMENT CLOSED Attack Party search compartment and boundaries.Look for smoke, fire, heat.Attack Party search boundaries, using indicator test plugs, viewingports, security spyholes etc. Look for smoke, fire, heat. NO FIRE FOUNDFIRE FOUND g47g47g47g47g47g47 FIRE g47 EVIDENT g47g47 NO FIRE g47 EVIDENT g47 Attack Party and Dept g47 specialist search g47 compartment and adjacent g47 compartments. g47 Report to HQ1 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 Attack Party open door g47 hatch slowly and check g47 compartment. g47 Report to HQ1 g47 g47g47 HQ1 activate SSEPHFEP g47g47g47 Fig 21F-1. Smoke Alarm Reaction Guide. Note. In older ships, with the high voltage smoke alarm system, the HQ1 alarm must be accepted and reset at the first stage of the procedure.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21F-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21G-1 OriginalANNEX G TO CHAPTER 21 FIREFIGHTING KILL CARDS 1. Application of Kill Cards Ships are to raise Kill cards for all high fire risk, explosive risk and the high value compartments. Cards may be raised for other compartments at the discretion of ships officers.Compartments and spaces should be classified according to the risk inherent in their function, ie a.High Fire Risk. Main and auxiliary machinery sp aces, diesel-generator rooms, gas- turbine generator compartments, uptakes and downtakes, ventilation trunks from the machinery spaces up to the fire flaps, machinery removal and escape trunks to the above compartments, fuel pump spaces, hangars and galleys. b.Explosive Risk. Magazines, lockers, RU stores a nd designated danger areas as defined in BR 862 - Naval Magazine and Explosive Regulations. c.Electronic and Operational Spaces of High Value. Operations room, computer rooms, designated communications and wea pon equipment compartments, ship control centres, navigation equipment compartments, switchboard rooms, el ectrical distribution centres, telephone exchanges, conversion e quipment rooms, EW spaces, main cable and wiring spaces. 2. Disposition of Kill Cards The Kill Cards are provided as Form S.3201 and are A4 size. They have holes punched, so that they can be bound together to form a loose- leaf book which can be indexed. They are to be indexed numerically. The completed car ds are to be available as follows a. NBCD HQ1 and HQ2 - full sets.b. Section BasesFRPPs - cards for compartment s within the responsibility of the Section BaseFRPP. c. An additional card is to be secured adj acent to the outside of the compartment door. 3. Information Kill Cards must include the following information if applicable a. Recommended minimum time of operati on of each steamgas drench or foamwater-spray system. b. Equipments, stores, services etc contained within the compartment with those items of extra high risk being so noted, and their positi on in the compartment stated. A fuel line, hydraulic service pipe or air se rvice pipe could add appreciably to the hazard of the fire if ruptured.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21G-2 UK RESTRICTEDc. Any other relevant information, displaye d on a simple diagram of the compartment layout to assist firefighters entering th e compartment. The diagram should also include positions of obstructi ons and passageways. d. The presence of any structure other than mild steel, eg aluminium or melamine plastic laminate. e. The presence and details of any Fire Barrier Insulation FBI fitted is to be indicated by a broken black line with the notation Fire Ba rrier Insulation, followed by the type of material in brackets ie Type A90, Type A60 or Type A30. f. Boundary temperature monitoring points. 4.A generic example of a completed Firefightin g Kill Card is at Figs 21G-1 front and Fig 21G-2 back. 5. Smoke Clearance Plans A space is provided on the Kill Card for smoke clearance action. If th is space is too small to contain the information, a separate Smoke Clearance Plan is to be made up, with an alphabetical cross-reference on the Kill Card. An example of a Smoke clearance Plan is at Fig21G-3.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21G-3 Original Fig 21G-1. Example of a Kill Card frontBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21G-4 UK RESTRICTED Fig 21G-2. Example of a Kill Card backUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21G-5 Original2P 2Q2RSmoke logged compartment doorsopenNon-smoke logged closedSMOKE CLEARANCE PLAN 1. Sentries to be placed on ALL open doors hatches 2. Briefed to shut ope nings on BRACE Command 3. HQ1 informed at end of smoke clearance4. Do not start ATUs unless fan is in smoke free area5. Smoke Curtains to be tied back K OPEN DOORS AND HATCHES CLOSED DOORS AND HATCHES ADDITIONAL EXH FANS DOORS 2KM2MP2PQ2QR2R 2S 1Aft AirlockHATCHES DOORS 2JKHATCHES 2N 2P2Q2S1K1MExh No 8 starter in AFU No 5 Exh No 17 2R starter in laundryExh No 18 2S starter in 2R lobby ATUs See Note 4 Above If fire in JRs Bathroom 2R1, NBCD store 2Rz1 of undress area 2Sz, open appropriatedoors to atmosphere and close airlock 2R2SAER Hydraulic Hatch FER Hydraulic HatchFAMR Hydraulic HatchATU No 14 2R AFU No 5 INSUPPLY FANSSup No 6 1P starter in Trans MG Compt Sup No 8 2R starter in laundrySup No 9 2R Starter in drying rmBLOW MACHY VENT RUNNING FER Supply PSAER Supply PSAAMR Supply PSMACHY VENT STOPPED FER Exh PSAER Exh PSAAMR Exh PS Fig 21G-3. Example of a Smoke Clearance PlanBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21G-6 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21H-1 Change 3ANNEX H TO CHAPTER 21 FIREFIGHTING IN A CHEMICAL g47 ENVIRONMENT - BA PROCEDURES 1.The protective clothing for fire fighting in various NBC environments is detailed in Chapter 26. When a ships firefighting team is required to leave the citadel to fight a fire in a chemical environment liquid or vapour the followi ng BA procedures should be adopted. 2. Before Leaving the Citadel a. The BA Controller is to carry the teams respirators in their haversacks.b. The Firefighting Team is to remain in the citadel, off air, until informed that all hoses are rigged. c. The Team is to be briefed before they go on air.d. The Team and BA Controller are to ex it the citadel under the control of HQ1. 3.If the ship is free from contamination within the citadel, then it may be possible for the team to exit the ship on air after undertaking the nor mal face seal check and proceed directly to the fire endurance of the BA set should be considered . However, if those inside the citadel are wearing respirators when the team is required to exit the citadel, then the following routines forchanging from respirators to EDBA should be followed. g47 4. Changing from NBC Respirator to EDBA The firefighter should change from respir ator to EDBA in the following manner a. Select a sheltered position if on the upper deck.b. Put on the EDBA set, check the DV by-pass knob is off and open the bottle fully. To ease donning the facemask with the eyes shut, the straps should be folded around the front of the facemask and the facemask neck strap placed out of the way of the facemask.Firefighting gloves are placed, open e nd down, under the EDBA waist strap. c. Decontaminate the EDBA facemask and straps using Fullers Earth DKP1.d. Remove headgear, antiflash hood in a vapour environment, IPE suit hood if in a liquid environment. e. Using the buddy system, open the EDBA DV by-pass knob, take a deep breath and shut the eyes. The BA Controller then re moves the Firefighters respirator and the Firefighter, bending forward, dons the firefighters hood and the EDBA facemask f. Ease the top of the facemask away from the forehead momentarily to allow the air to purge out of the mask. Tighten the head ha rness straps, open the eyes and continue to breathe. Take a deep breath to operate the first-breath positive pressure mechanism, thenturn off the by-pass.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21H-2 UK RESTRICTEDg. Carry out a face seal check. h. Pull up the firefighters hood, don FFHBC and, if in a vapour environment, put on firefighting gloves. Using the buddy system check each-others dress. i. The BA Controller, on completion of filling out the control board, decontaminates the respirators, placing them in their haversacks and keeps them available for future use. 5. Changing from EDBA to NBC Respirator The four man Firefighting Team should change from EDBA to respirators in the following manner. a. If dressed as required for a vapour hazard environment 1 Select a sheltered position on the upper deck.2 Remove FFHBC. The BA Controller then removes the firefighting gloves and rolls the firefighters hood down around the Firefighters neck. 3 The BA Controller opens the Firefighte rs haversack and presents the respirator and DKP1 to the firefighter, who removes these items. 4 The Firefighters decontaminate th eir respirators and the BA Controller decontaminates his gloves w ith Fullers Earth DKP1. 5 The Firefighter takes a deep breath and shuts his eyes. The BA Controller removes the EDBA facemask and the Firefi ghter dons his respirator in the normal manner, breathing out hard to clear any contamination inside. 6 When the BA Controller has removed the EDBA facemask from the firefighter, he presses the DV re-set button. 7 If necessary, the Firefighter, using th e buddy system carries out the personal decontamination drill see BR 21702. 8 The Firefighter replaces his firefighters hood and ta kes his haversack from the BA Controller. 9 The Firefighter collects all items of firefighting clothing and equipment and proceeds to the weathering point on the upperdeck. 10 EDBAs and firefighters helmets etc are then hung up to weather. 11 Firefighters wearing fearnought and re spirator then proceed to the Cleansing g47 Station to enter the ship. b. If dressed as required for a liquid environmentUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21H-3 Change 11 Select a sheltered position on the upper deck. 2 Decontaminate NBC gloves us ing Fullers Earth DKP1. 3 Loosen and pull back the hood of the NBC suit.4 The BA Controller opens the Firefighte rs haversack and presents the respirator and DKP1 to the Firefighter, who removes these items. 5 The Firefighters decontaminate th eir respirators and the BA Controller decontaminates his gloves w ith Fullers Earth DKP1. 6 The Firefighter takes a deep breath and shuts his eyes. The BA Controller removes the EDBA facemask and the Firefi ghter dons his respirator in the normal manner, breathing out hard to clear any contamination inside. 7 When the BA Controller has removed the EDBA facemask from the Firefighter, he presses the DV re-set button. 8 Using the buddy system, the Firefighter carries out the personal decontamination drill see BR 21702. 9 The Firefighter replaces his NBC hood and takes his haversack from the BA Controller. 10 The Firefighter collects all items of firefighting clothing and equipment and proceed to the weathering point on the upperdeck. 11 EDBAs, etc are then hung up to weather. g47 12 Firefighters then proceed to the Cleansing Station to enter the ship. 6.The procedure for undressing and cleansing fro m a fearnought suit is detailed in BR 21702.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21H-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21I-1 Change 1ANNEX I TO CHAPTER 21 g47 g47 FIREFIGHTING ASSISTANCE TO OTHER SHIPS g47 g47 1. Initial Assessment and Planning g47 The following points should be considered during the in itial assessment of an incident in g47 another ship at sea, before committing firefighting or search and rescue teams g47 g47 a. Accounting for personnel and casualties. g47 g47 b. Establishing an incident boundary and checks of adjacent compartments. g47 g47 c. Assessment of the hazards to firefighting or search and rescue SAR operations eg g47 hazardous cargo, fuel, live electrical systems, pressurised systems, smoke-logging, restricted g47 access, sea state. g47 g47 d. Informing shore authorities and other ships in the area. g47 g47 e. Availability of ships boats for transfer of personnel and stores. g47 g47 f. The establishment of a stability datum and the effects of firefighting operations on g47 stability. g47 g47 g. The availability of ship systems eg fi re pumps, electrical supplies, ventilation, g47 emergency lighting, fixed firefightin g systems, portable equipment, BA. g47 g47 h. Compatibility of hose connecti ons. Availability of the In ternational Shore Connection. g47 g47 i. The hazards associated with cargoes c ontaining Toxic Industrial Materials see BR g47 21702 Chapter 5. g47 g47 j. Prior agreement of the assistance to be provided. g47 g47 k. Prioritisation of actions and agreement of the plan SAR, CASEVAC, containment, g47 firefighting. g47 g47 2. Information Sources g47 The following information sources should be av ailable to assist with the initial assessment g47 and incident planning g47 g47 a.Fire Control Plans. These should be available in either English or French in all g47 merchant ships conformin g with IMO conventions. They should be kept, usually in a red g47 container, either on the bridge or at gangwa y positions. They contain detailed information g47 on ship firefighting equipment, fire lockers, fixed systems, ventilation plans, etc. They may g47 be very complex, requiring assistance from the ships crew to interpret them. g47 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21I-2 UK RESTRICTEDb.Dangerous Goods Declaration. Dangerous cargoes should be identified by IMDG g47 Codes, which are detailed in Ch apter 5 of BR 21702. In some ships these may not be very g47 accurate, so all cargo should be treated as hazardous until c onfirmed otherwise. g47 g47 c.Cargo PlanManifest. The Manifest gives details of cargo locations and the order in g47 which it has been stowed for unloading. This may also be a complex document, requiring g47 assistance to decode and interpret. g47 g47 d.Stability Data. This may be difficult to find. Consideration should be given to g47 nominating a Stability Officer to monitor and update stability information, using a portable g47 stability board. If normal RN firefighting techniques are used in ships with large deck areas, g47 free surface water could quickly pose a threat to stability. g47 g47 3. Nomination of Responsible Officers g47 Personnel should be nominated as Res ponsible Officers for the following g47 g47 a. Stability. g47 g47 b. Logistics. g47 g47 c. Communications. g47 g47 d. Safety. g47 g47 e. BA Control. g47 g47 f. BA Coordination. g47 g47 g. Firefighting water supply. g47 g47 h. Firefighting operations. g47 g47 i. SAR operations. g47 g47 j. Casualty handling. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21J-1 Change 3ANNEX J TO CHAPTER 21 GAS TURBINE MODULE RE-ENTRY PROCEDURES 1. Introduction The generic guidance provided in this Annex is to be adapted to suit individual ship machinery and equipment before being incorpor ated into local Standing Orders. These procedures concentrate on module re-entry after the initial watchk eepers actions detailed in the respective Machinery Drills BRs. There are tw o procedures, one for peacetime operations and one for the Action State. The principles of ma intaining module integrity while cooling, purging and then re-entering in the safest possible ma nner, without re-ignition are to take precedence in peacetime incidents. Purge times are not statut ory personnel in charge are to decide on safe and sensible periods, base d on available information. PART 1 - MODULE RECOVERY IN PEACETIME 2. Containment Stage Unless the module has been breached, the ope ration of fire suppression systems should extinguish a fire within a module. Uptakes, downtakes, associated ventilation trunking and all sides of the module require monitoring and coolin g. The most susceptible areas of modules are the flexible gussets between the engine raft, intake cascade bend and the acoustic enclosure. Anengine fire will probably result in the module windows becoming blacked out or, at best, allow only a limited view of the interior. Continual checks using any visual indications through themodule windows and all thermometers fitted and portable should c onfirm that temperatures are reducing and that no re-ignition has occurred. Em pty fixed firefighting cylinders single shot only are to be replaced during this stage. If considered safe, mach inery space ventilation may be used to clear fumes and provide fresh air for personnel within the compartment. 3. Firefighting Preparation Stage Two hoses are required, one for a waterwall a nd one for foam. The waterwall should be by a standard hose with a firefighter nozzle or, if not fitted, a CFHR. Foam should be by a FB5X or, if not fitted, a CFHR. Where possible, these hoses are to be from within the machinery space, to allow the access to be closed during module re-entry. Boundary cooling hoses may be used once temperatures have reduced. A four-man Re -entry Team in Full Firefighting Rig is to be dressed and briefed. 4. Module Purge Stage The aim of this stage is to clear the module of combustion products and gas, and reduce the temperature before re-entry. Before commencing the purge, consideration must be given to the exit location of the purge gases. If necessary , the weather deck in the area of the module ventilation outlet should be cleared and the ships course relative to the wind may need alteration. After confirming that the module in terior is safe to purge tem perature and observation via the module window, the ventilation flaps may be caref ully opened. Immediately check the interior of the module for signs of re-ignition. If re -ignition has not occurred, module purging may now commence. If, at any stage, re-ignition occurs, immediately stop the purge, shut the purge valveand ventilation flaps, and operate the fixed firefighting system.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21J-2 UK RESTRICTED5.The method of purging is depende nt on the design of the module a. Module Enclosure Ventilation Fan This is a fully contained method with the least risk to personnel in the machinery space. After ope ning the ventilation flaps, the enclosure fan is started and the module interior is purge d. Personnel require no additional protection except Basic Firefighting Rig. b. Module Purge Valve Module purging is achieved by the use of the machinery space ventilation fans. S upply fans are run and exhaust fans stopped, therefore pressurising the machinery space. Transit tofrom the machiner y space requires tight control to ensure that a positive machinery space pressure is maintain ed. Intermediate Firefighting Rig is worn but BA face masks need not be donned except for the initial opening of the purge valve. Care is to be taken when initially opening the purge valve, to confirm the correct airflowdirection and no re-ignition. A sentry with at least a portable extinguisher is to remain in the vicinity of the purge valve throughout the purging operation. 6. Module Re-entry Stage When purging is complete and the module temp erature has reduced to an acceptable level, all ventilation is to be stopped and the module ventilation flap spurge valves shut. All personnel not wearing Full Firefighting Rig are to leave the machinery space. Close all machinery space accesses, where possible, and post sentries. Entry by the four-man team is to be authorised bythe MEO and conducted with hoses charged and nozzles shut. 7. Recovery Stage Once re-entry has been achieved, machinery sp ace ventilation may be restarted to clear any products of combustion from the machinery space the module door is left open. When the atmosphere is clear, the Re-entry Team may go off air, and personnel without BA may re-enter the machinery space. Damage to the en gine and module is to be assessed a nd, if possible, rectified. PART 2 - MODULE RECOVERY IN ACTION 8. Risk Management in Action The principles of module recovery in the Action State are driven by the Command Aim at the time of the incident. Strong and effective management is essential. Some calculated risksand decisions may be needed to achieve speedy r ecovery of the engine. The drill reactions and module checks share much with the peacetime pro cedure. However, the imperatives of the Command Aim may necessitate more rapid module entry to assess serviceability, identify repair actions and arrange logistic technical support requirements. 9. Containment Stage Cooling should be concentrated on the ar eas most likely to breach, allowing loss of BCFBTM from the module. The flexible gussets can be cooled by one person using a CFHR, g47 releasing other manpower for blanket searching and other first aid actions. Should the Command veto tripping of the engine, consideration should be given to more robust cooling methods.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21J-3 Change 310.In the event of a module breach, initial leakst opping should be actioned and full containment instigated, with the aim of reducing the leakage of BCFBTM and preventing the spread of fireto the machinery space. The use of breathing apparatus will be require d in this instance. g47 11.An engine fire will probably result in the m odule windows becoming blacked out or, at best, allow a limited view of the interior. The use of fitted temperature gauges may be the onlymethod of confirming that a fire is extinguishe d. Checking of thermometers in module windows should be included in State 1 preparations. 12. Firefighting Preparation Stage Driven by the Command Aim, the urgency to recover the module will dictate the level of firefighting equipment deployed and whether the fixed gas drench cylinders should be changed. The potential exposure to higher than normal temperatures and the possibility of re-ignition mustbe considered. A size 2 hose with firefighte r nozzle for personal protection and an FB5X must g47 be used. In ships with no hydrants within the space CFHRs may be used one on water and one g47 on foam. Personnel involved in othe r urgent tasks such as blanket searching, leak stopping, etc g47 should carry an ELSA and continue until comple te, and when available should assist in the g47 recovery of the engine. g47 13. Purge and Recovery Stage The initial communications between the local position and the SCCMCR should determine the course of action. The Action crew should a ssess the local situation and request permission to purge and recover the module, taking account of the timescales involved. The order from HQ1 g47 to conduct an Action Recovery should authorise the Action crew to start the machinery space ventilation, purge and enter the module without further reference to the SCCMCR. It is therefore imperative that all factors are considered before ordering a recovery. The Action g47 NBCDO is to authorise the re-entry. g47 14.The IC of the space should risk assess actions in line with ship priorities, including the g47 situation with regard to personne l remaining in the space, access to ELSA or breathing apparatus g47 and an escape route. Any personnel remaining w ithin the space are to be informed that the g47 recovery is to be conducted. Action crews must then ensure that any personnel leaving the g47 machinery space are aware of the proposed recovery , and order them to start the machinery space supply fans and act as sentries at the machinery space access door. External help may be needed to achieve these tasks. 15.The method of purging recommende d in order to ensure that the quickest possible recovery g47 can be achieved is as follows. Module vent fl aps should be opened and module checked for re- g47 ignition. If no re-ignition then the MMS supply fans should be started once permission has been g47 granted. The purging time should be at the disc retion of the IC of the space, but approved by g47 the PM, taking into account the circumstances th at prevail and the prio rity placed on recovery. g47 The Action crew with the necessary fire figh ting equipment and BA being worn should then g47 crack open the module door sufficiently to estab lish a purging air flow. Once purged the module g47 door is to be fully opene d and re-entry undertaken. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21J-4 UK RESTRICTED16. Engine Repair Stage Specialist manpower should be ac tivated while the Action Recovery is underway and every effort should be made to restor e the engine to a serviceable c ondition as quickly as possible. Documentation and stores support should be primed as part of th e initial actions, so that engine fault detection and repair can be started as soon as the module has been entered. Additional manpower may be required and this need s careful management by the Propulsion ManagerAction MEOOW.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21K-1 Change 1ANNEX K TO CHAPTER 21 g47 g47 SMOKE BOUNDARY MANAGEMENT g47 g47 1.During the initial attack on a fire the person discovering the fire, those in the immediate g47 vicinity responding to the Loud Vocal Alarm and the Attack Party are ex pected to commence a g47 continuous, aggressive attack on the fire, initially without the re spiratory protection provided by g47 Breathing Apparatus. There is clearly a risk to those personnel from the smoke inhalation and g47 this must be balanced against the consequences of a small fire developing into a major incident. g47 g47 2.To contain and prevent the spread of smoke through the ship, smoke boundaries should be g47 established quickly by the person in control of th e FCP. These should be at the periphery of the g47 smoke-logged compartments and the closest tenable area to the scene of the fire. Smoke g47 boundaries must not fully enclose the fire until all non-BA wearing pers onnel known to be within g47 the boundary have withdrawn. Only then should the final boundary be established this will g47 normally be directly between the FCP and the SOTI. Controlled Access into the smoke g47 boundary zone must be strictly enforced at the FCP. To this end, HQ1 must pipe the location of g47 all smoke boundaries and the location of the FCP. All other doors and ha tches forming part of g47 the boundary should be manned to prevent unauthor ised personnel entering the smoke affected g47 area and jeopardising additi onal areas of the ship. g47 g47 3.In major warships smoke boundaries must be established by shu tting watertight doors, g47 hatches and ventilation closures . Whilst non watertight doors, sm oke curtains and water walls g47 can be used to impede the spread of smoke, especia lly in the early attack on the fire, they are less g47 effective and should not be considered physical boundaries. g47 g47 4.In ships with limited watertight sub divisi on, such as MMPPs and those vessels built to g47 commercial standards, it may not always be practicable, or desirable, to establish all smoke g47 boundaries at the watertight closures. In certa in cases, non-watertight doors, hatches or smoke g47 curtains may need to be utilised. In this way, vital areas of the ship may remain more readily g47 accessible and the FCP and key positions remain as close as practicable to the SOTI. In these g47 circumstances personnel in charge of incide nts must remain alert to their vulnerab ility and g47 increased risks in the event of any sudden escalation of the fire. g47 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 21K-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANK g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-1 Change 3CHAPTER 22 HIGH PRESSURE SEA WATER SYSTEMS AND ASSOCIATED FIREFIGHTING EQUIPMENT Para I n t e r m e d i a t e P r e s s u r e a n d L o w P r e s s u r e S e a W a t e r S y s t e m s .................. 2203 H P S W P u m p s ...................................................... 2204 D o m e s t i c S e r v i c e s ................................................... 2205 H P S W M a i n........................................................ 2206 P r e s s u r e G a u g e s ..................................................... 2208 S h o r e C o n n e c t i o n s ................................................... 2209 H y d r a n t s........................................................... 2210 H o s e s ............................................................. 2211 H o s e C o u p l i n g s ..................................................... 2212 S t o w a g e o f H o s e s.................................................... 2213 N o z z l e s............................................................ 2214 F i x e d H a t c h W a t e r w a l l N o z z l e ......................................... 2215 W a t e r w a l l N o z z l e M o u n t i n g P o l e ....................................... 2216 F o a m - m a k i n g B r a n c h p i p e s ............................................ 2217 F B 5 X M k 2 F o a m - m a k i n g B r a n c h p i p e ................................... 2218 F B 1 0 1 0 F o a m - m a k i n g B r a n c h p i p e...................................... 2219 C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f F o a m - m a k i n g B r a n c h p i p e s .............................. 2220 Portable Inline Inductor FBU5 .......................................... 2221 C o n t r o l l a b l e Y P i e c e ................................................. 2222 I n l i n e C o n t r o l l a b l e C o u p l i n g P i e c e ...................................... 2223 Double Ended Hose Adaptor ........................................... 2224 F l a n g e A d a p t o r s ..................................................... 2225 E m e r g e n c y B u l k h e a d H o s e C o n n e c t i o n s .................................. 2227 C e n t r e F e e d H o s e R e e l................................................ 2228 CFHR. Standby Condition ............................................. 2229 C F H R O p e r a t i n g I n s t r u c t i o n s .......................................... 2231 C F H R N o z z l e M o u n t i n g P o l e .......................................... 2232 R a m f a n............................................................ 2233 Flooding and Spraying Systems ......................................... 2236 g47 M a n u a l l y O p e r a t e d S p r a y S y s t e m s ...................................... 2237 g47 A u t o m a t i c S p r a y S y s t e m s ............................................. 2338 g47 P r e s s u r i s e d R e s e r v o i r S y s t e m s.......................................... 2339 g47 R a p i d R e a c t i o n S p r a y S y s t e m s ......................................... 2240 g47 M e t r o n A c t i v a t e d S p r a y S y s t e m s........................................ 2241 g47 H a n g a r S p r a y S y s t e m s ................................................ 2243 g47 D r y R i s e r s ......................................................... 2244 g47 F l i g h t D e c k s ........................................................ 2245 g47 Dutch Rolling of Hoses ............................................... 2246 g47 F l i g h t D e c k M o n i t o r ................................................. 2247 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-3 Change 1CHAPTER 22 HIGH PRESSURE SEA WATER SYSTEMS AND ASSOCIATED FIREFIGHTING EQUIPMENT 2201. The high pressure sea water HPSW system supplies sea water throughout the ship, usually by means of a ring main, to supply the following services a. Firefighting installations including spray systems in machinery spaces, magazines, flammable stowages and other high risk areas. b. Prewetting systems.c. Domestic and sanitary services.d. Ballasting and deballasting water-compensated fuel tanks and other tanks used for stability purposes. e. Eductors for salvage and general drainage.f. Hangar spraying systems in aircraft carriers.g. Flight deck firefighting systems in aircraft carriers.h. Cooling of essential machinery and equipment. 2202. Pumping, flooding and draining are dealt with in Chapter 28. Portable and mobile g47 firefighting equipment, and fixed firefighting installations other than those supplied from the g47 HPSW system are dealt with in Chapter 23. This chapter contains a general description of the g47 HPSW installations and their associated firefighting equipment. For detailed information g47 concerning specific ships, re ference should be made to th e appropriate NBCD Class Book. g47 g47 2203. Intermediate Pressure and Low Pressure Sea Water Systems g47 Cooling for electrical and othe r equipment and emergency c ooling for certain other items g47 of machinery can be supplied by sea water, at reduced pressure, from the HPSW system. g47 2204. HPSW Pumps The HP sea water main is supplied by electrically driven pumps of 72-200 m 3h capacity according to the size of ship. They are design ed to produce about 7 bar pressure in the system and are dispersed throughout the ship, inside and outside the machinery spaces. The number of pumps fitted in any ship is based on the water requirement for firefighting, deballasting orprewetting, whichever is the greatest, together with any essential service such as emergencycooling water for important equipment, plus a llowance for breakdowns. The sole duty of these pumps is to supply the HPSW main. They norma lly take suction directly from the sea although g47 one or more of the pumps can al so take suction from the discharg e side of the diesel generator heat exchanger, or some other hot discharge, so that warmed water can be delivered to the system g47 in arctic conditions. This facility is not fitted in all ships.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-4 UK RESTRICTED2205. Domestic Services If it is possible, domestic services such as supplies to bathroom eductors, sanitary services, garbage disposal, sewage plants, refrigerating plant and other similar services, aregenerally grouped together so that supplies can r eadily be isolated to en able adequate pressure to be maintained in the system in an emergency. 2206. HPSW Main This can be a ring main, a single line of piping, or cross-connected double lines, running fore and aft with extensions and branches as n ecessary to carry sea water under pressure to all parts of the ship. It is identified by bands of green tape, marked SEA, around the piping. Branches for firefighting and spra y systems are painted bright re d throughout their length. The main usually runs fairly high in the ship above the waterline. It is intended to work at about 7 bar but damage or other causes may cause the pressure to drop below this and most appliances for use on the main are designed to work at pressures as low as 2.4 bar. 2207. The pumps discharge through vertical pipes called rising mains, which lead into the HPSW main. The numbering system for HPSW main valves is detailed in Chapter 2. To prevent g47 flooding from, or loss of pressure in, a damaged main, isolatin g valves are fitted a. On each side of the junction of the rising main with the HP sea water main.b. In the rising main below its junction with the HP sea water main.c. On each side of branches leading to spraying installations.d. At each watertight bulkhead transverse or longitudinal if there is no other isolating valve in that section. e. On each side of a cross conn ection junction with the main. 2208. Pressure Gauges Direct reading pressure gauges are fitted in the HPSW main adjacent to each riser. For single spot helicopter decks a direct reading gauge is fitted in the branch from the mainimmediately upstream of the monitors and hangar spray system. In ships with between-deckhangars pressure gauges are fitted in each hang ar access lobby to indicate upper main pressure. The remote pressure information in each zone is displayed in the SCCHQ1, HQ2 andor AHQand Section Bases. Where the main is fitted on port and starboard sides of the ship, as a ringmain, they are treated as separate mains and each is fitted with pressure gauges. 2209. Shore Connections Connections into the HPSW main are provi ded normally fore and aft port and starboard to enable shore-supply water to be used for fire fighting purposes while the ship is in dock. These can also be used for rigging emergency fore-aft breeching hoses in the event of damage to the system. In ships with flooding systems, water can be supplied up to the sea inlet valves through flooding bonnets.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-5 Change 1 2210. Hydrants These are fitted to the HPSW main throughout the ship, each consisting of a screw-down or single-action lever operated control valve controlling one or two outlets which should be blanked by caps when not fitted with ready-use hoses or required for use. The screw-down valveshould be shut HAND TIGHT only, as overtightenin g will cause damage to the valve seat. The single action lever opera ted control valve should, when require d to be operated, be opened slowly to avoid the possible displacement of the seal. 2211. Hoses Impermeable lay-flat delivery hoses are supp lied for use with the HPSW main, and they g47 vary in length from 2 metres to 18 metres in the following two sizes a.No 2 Size. Of 50mm 2 inch diameter for general use at all hydrants throughout the ship except those fitted with No 3 hoses as sub-para b below. b.No 3 Size. Of 70mm 2 inch diameter and fo r use with FB10X foam branchpipes g47 and fixed inline inductors on flightdecks a nd in hangar positions of some aircraft g47 carriers. An allowance of No 3 hoses is also stowed at each Fire and Repair Party Post g47 for use as a temporary HPSW main and as discharge hoses from portable pumps. 2212. Hose Couplings Firefighting hoses are joined together and connected to the HPSW main by instantaneous couplings Fig 22-1. Each coup ling has a male and a female half. All hydrants have female connections so that when coupling a hose, THE MALE END MUST BE TAKEN TO THEHYDRANT AND THE FEMALE END TOWARDS THE FIRE. The marrying parts of thecouplings are of one standard si ze but the tails are of size to suit the hoses concerned. The female half of each coupling has a rubber seal which should be inspected regularly and g47 maintained in good order. Fig 22-1. Instantaneous Coupling 2213. Stowage of Hoses A hose should at all times be coupled to each hydrant and a nozzle connected to the hose so that water can be delivered immediately if it is needed Fig 22-2. Although fa irly robust, hoses need care if they are to be kept in g ood order, and the following instructions must be observed. a. Hoses are to be faked down in their st owages ready for running out. Where double- hose baskets are fitted, the hose in the section of the basket closest to the bulkhead mustbe a faked 12m hose and that in the basket furthest from the bulkhead is to be a rolled 6m hose.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-6 UK RESTRICTED b. Hoses should not be left faked in their stowages for periods exceeding four months without being removed and run out for insp ection. The position of the folds should be shifted when re-stowing. c. Particularly when kinked, the hose s hould not be dragged over rough surfaces, especially when charged with water. To do so will subject it to severe local abrasion. Fig 22-2. Stowage of Fire Hose d. Because of pump vibration, a hose may chaf e where it first touches the deck after leaving a portable pump outlet. This point of contact should be protected by wrapping rags around the hose. Similarly, protective padding should be used where the hose passes over sharp edges, such as door or hatch coamings. e. To avoid subjecting the hose to sudden shock or strain, and to avoid possible displacement of the seal, hydrants and pum p delivery valves shoul d always be opened g47 slowly, and sudden closure of the nozzle should be avoided. f. Hoses must be drained and wiped down before being stow ed. To expel water, hoses should not be walked along the deck but should be under-run at shoulder height. g. Hoses and couplings must not be painted.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-7 Change 3 h. Hoses should be washed and flushed thr ough after contamination with fuels, oils and greases, and after use with AFFF. i. Hoses, which are not filled with water, catch fire or melt when in contact with excessive heat or fire and must be st owed away from hot pipes or structure. j. Sea lashings may be fitted to upperdeck hose cradles in MMPPs to prevent loss or damage to the rolled and fa ked hoses during rough weather and high sea states. However, they must not inhibit access to, and the operation of, the hoses during anemergency. k. CVSLPH hangar fire point basket carry two No 3 hoses. The inboard hose is Dutch g47 rolled the outer hose is faked down in its stowage. g47 2214. Nozzles Two types of hand-held nozzle are in service in HM ships a.Firefighter Nozzle Fig 22-3. The Firefighter nozzle is provided at all between g47 deck fire hydrants, already connected to a 12 metre faked hose. It is stowed in the shut g47 position. To operate the nozzle turn it one eighth of a turn to the right to provide a 2 g47 metre flat disc personal protection waterwall. A further turn of one eighth of a turn to g47 the right produces a 60 degree ragged spray, wh ich is used for fighting fires. The output g47 from a firefighter nozzler ranges from 10 to 17 cubic metres per hour see Table 22-1. g47 g47 b.Waterwall Nozzle Fig 22-4. These are provided at all weatherdeck hydrants and three are kept in each FRPP fire locker for use in providing waterwalls. They are stowedin the shut position, which is achieved by turning the rotating sleeve clockwise looking from the operator which takes the rotating sleeve away from the operator. Opening thenozzle by rotating the sleeve anti-clockwise produces, initially, a jet, but the nozzle mustbe opened fully to produce the desired waterwall. Water discharge capacities are givenin Table 22-1. Fig 22-3. Firefighter Nozzle Fig 22-4. Waterwall NozzleBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-8 UK RESTRICTEDTable 22-1. Water Capaciti es of Nozzles in m3h Pressure Waterwall FirefighterHatch Waterwall bar Spray 110Spray 90Jet Spray 45Spray 90Jet 2.4 3.54.55.56.97.08.323.9 28.732.536.440.4 44.322.9 27.430.734.037.8 42.215.5 18.321.123.926.4 28.78.3 10.211.512.714.2 15.75.4 6.47.48.19.3 10.29.7 11.513.114.716.3 17.810 Note. To convert m 3h into litresmin approximately multiply m3h by 17. Table 22-2. Foam-Producing Char acteristics of Branchpipes FB5X Mk 2 FB1010 Water pressure in bar AFFF consumpti on in litresmin Foam delivery in litresmin5.5 13.52,250not less than 4.1 254,540 Table 22-3. Water Capacities of Branchpipes in m 3h Water Pressure in Bar FB5X Mk 2 FB1010 2.4 3.44.85.56.98.39.1 10.412.113.414.916.522.4 26.930.534.038.141.1 2215. Fixed Hatch Waterwall Nozzle Fixed hatch waterwall nozzles are fitted primarily in the corners their spray angle is approximately 120 of all hatches leading to high fire risk compartments to facilitate re-entry when firefighting by providing a more effective sealing waterwall and possibly reducing thenumber of personnel in close proximity to the hatc h. Where the fitting of these nozzles obstructs guardrail stanchions then the stanchions must be re-sited and their chains adjusted to lengthaccordingly. The nozzle blanking cap is to bear the same watertight and gastight control markingas the hatch and is to be fitted when the nozzle is not in use.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-9 Change 1 Fig 22-5. Fixed Hatch Waterwall Nozzle 2216. Waterwall Nozzle Mounting Pole g47 The procedure, detailed in Annex A to Ch apter 21 and in BR 4007, for fighting surface g47 ship fires from below requires an operating waterwall nozzle to be raised through a hatchway g47 from below. This is achieved by mounting th e nozzle on a special, one metre long, pole See g47 Fig 22-6. A separate, two metre long, support pole See Fig 22- 7 is used for pushing the hatch g47 open from the deck below. The V shaped cradle on this pole is used to assist in positioning the g47 waterwall nozzle mounting pole in the hatchway. A lug on the waterwall mounting pole allows g47 it to be located on the hatch coaming. g47 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 Fig 22-6. Waterwall Nozzle Mounting Pole g47 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-10 UK RESTRICTED g47 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 Fig 22-7. Support Pole g47 2217. Foam-making Branchpipes The two types of foam-making branchpipe used in ships are the FB5X Mk 2 and the g47 FB1010. g47 2218. FB5X Mk 2 Foam-making Branchpipe g47 The FB5X Mk 2 is a lightweight branchpipe for general use against liquid fires in ships, g47 except in the hangar or on the flight deck. It is only to be used with size 2 hoses. Using size 2 g47 hoses, the consumption rate for a 20 litre containe r of AFFF is 70 seconds with a water pressure of 6.9 bar. A good backup supply of AFFF containe rs is therefore essential. The FB5X Mk 2 g47 is fitted with an openshut facility which enables the operator to control the foam discharge. It g47 is also fitted with a foam mix selector which for RN application must always be pinned at the sixper cent AFFF position. The pick- up assembly suction hose and spill are attached to the branchpipe by a quick-release coupling. The pi ck-up assembly is normally connected directly g47 to the branchpipe but can be transferred to th e associated portable inlin e inductor see Para 2221. g47 To induce AFFF, the cap of the AFFF container must be remove d and the spill pickup inserted. The FB5X is also used to put foam into machinery spaces through foam inlet tubes. g47 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 Fig 22-8. Foam Branchpipe FB5X Mk 2 g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-11 Change 32219. FB1010 Foam-making Branchpipe This is a high-output branchpipe used only on flight decks and Aircraft Carriers. Each g47 of the hydrants in these positions has an FBU10 inline inductor bolted to the flange before the instantaneous coupling. The pick -up assembly is attached to the inductor and has a shut-off cock which is to remain in the open position.. The inductor passes a mixture of AFFF and water g47 through a No 3 hose to the branchpipe which aerat es and delivers the foam at the rate of about 4540 litres per minute. The branchpipe needs a H PSW main pressure of not less than 4.1 bar at the branchpipe to produce foam of good quality, and will consume about 25 litres of AFFF per minute. A handle at the output end of the bran chpipe operates a swirl- vane selector which enables foam to be delivered to a distance like a jet or less forcibly as a spray. A waterwallnozzle is stowed at each hydrant and can be attached to the hose in place of the branchpipe, withthe pick-up shut off, to produce a waterwall spray protection. The FB1010 is a commercial variant of the FB10X and is similar in design and performance It replaces the FB10X only on a wastage basis. Fig 22-9. Foam Branchpi pe FB10X or FB1010 2220. Characteristics of F oam-making Branchpipes The foam-producing characteristics of the br anchpipes are given in Table 22-2 and the water capacities in m 3h of the branchpipes are given in Table 22-3. 2221. Portable Inline Inductor FBU5 This inductor is designed for use with the FB5X and its purpose is to allow AFFF to be introduced into the hoseline at or near the hydr ant position and not directly into the branchpipe. This allows the operator much greater mobility in that he is no longer encumbered by AFFFcontainers and the pickup assembly when passi ng through doorways, ha tches and when using ladders. The inline inductor comes complete with stowage bracket and a 2m length of No 2 hose for use between the hydrant and the inductor. Th e inline inductor is fitted with a quick release coupling which incorporates a non-return valve, this prevents the AFFF container being pressurised when the FB5X control valve is shut off. The pick-up spill for the inductor is taken from the branchpipe which no longer needs one wh en being used in conjunction with the inductor the spill connecting point on the branchpipes n eed not be blanked off. The inline inductor should not be used when the FB5X is being used to introduce foam via inlet tubes. The number of inductors onboard are small and they are best kept for use with firefighting hoses which are being moved around by operators, as opposed to sta tic hoses, eg those led to foam inlet tubes. Note. When using the FB5 X with its spill pickup assembly, the portable inline inductor should not be connected into the hoseline, as this will induce air and prevent foam induction at the branchpipe.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-12 UK RESTRICTED Fig 22-10. Portable Inline Inductor FBU5 Fig 22-11. Couplings and AdaptorsUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-13 Change 12222. Controllable Y Piece g47 The controllable Y piece, shown in Fi g 22-11a is manufactured from anodized g47 aluminium and replaces the non contro llable gunmetal version. It is carried in ships in order that two hoses may be run from a single hose or hy drant. It is particularly useful in a. Boundary cooling.b. Allowing the extension of a hose in either leg.c. Isolating burst hoses. CAUTION THESE ALUMINIUM Y PIECES ARE ONLY TO BE CONNECTED TO HYDRANTS USING THE 2 METRE LENGTH OF NO 3 HOSE PROVIDED.CONNECTING DIRECTLY TO THE HYDRANT WILL CAUSE THEALUMINIUM TO FRACTURE. WARNING Y PIECES ARE NOT TO BE USED TO PROVIDE A WATERWALL AND A FIREFIGHTING HOSE TO THE SAME TEAM OF FIREFIGHTERS. THEWATERWALL AND FIREFIGHTING HOSE MUST COME FROM DIFFERENTHYDRANTS. 2223. Inline Controllable Coupling Piece This coupling piece is shown in Fig 22-11b. It can be used g47 a. To connect onto through-bulkhead connectors to facilitate zone isolation.b. At clipped doors to enable closure in Condition Alfa.c. On long hose runs to enable the hose ha ndler to turn off and extend the run without going back to the hydrant. 2224. Double Ended Hose Adaptors The double male and double fema le instantaneous adaptors, shown in Fig 22-11c, are g47 provided to permit emergency runs of hoses between hydrants. 2225. Flange Adaptors A range of flange adaptors are provided to allow the HPSW main or firefighting pumps to be connected to other NATO ships or merchant ships. The adaptors are detailed in Chapter 28and ship allowances are listed in BR 21703. 2226. Spare.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-14 UK RESTRICTED 2227. Emergency Bulkhead Hose Connections The purpose of these connections is to allow a run of hoses, when the HP sea water main has been damaged, between adjo ining watertight subdivisions without compromising watertight integrity by opening doors. They may also be used to help contain smoke when firefighting by allowing watertight doors on sm oke boundaries to be kept clos ed. Connections are fitted in selected bulkheads, usually where the HPSW main is not duplicated and not adequately protected by structure, ie generally in the fore and afte r parts of the ship. Normally, the instantaneous coupling on the forward side of the bulkhead is fe male, and the after side is male. Where two connections are fitted in the same bulkhead, one will be male-aft and female-forward and onewill be female-aft and male-forward. The blanking caps must always be kept fitted to bulkheadhose connections except when the connections are in use, to preserve watertight integrity, and g47 they should bear the same WT and GT control marking as the adjacent door. g47 2228. Centre Feed Hose Reel The Centre Feed Hose Reel CFHR is a fi rst aid firefighting appliance, normally used in the FOAM mode, but with the facility to be used in the WATER mode for boundary cooling. Some ships, fitted with the early model inch hose reel in the machinery spaces do not have a foam pick up capability. The Mk 1 CFHR layout is shown at Fig 22-12 and the Mk 2 at g47 Fig 22-13. g47 Fig 22-12. Centre Feed FoamWat er Hose Reel Unit Mk 1 g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-15 Change 2 Fig 22-13. Centre Feed FoamWat er Hose Reel Unit Mk 2 g47 2229. CFHR Standby condition A number of ships with the Mk 1 CFHR are not fitted with an isolating valve adjacent to the inductor panel. These ships are to set the 3 position operating valve on the inductor to the OFF position. The normal STANDBY CONDITION for th e 3 way selector valves is summarised as follows a. Two HPSW Isolating Valves Fitted 1 HPSW isolating valve PINNED OPEN.2 HPSW valve adjacent to the inductor panel SHUT.3 Three position selector valve set to F OAM Mk 1 or FoamWater selection lever set to FOAM Mk 2. 4 Nozzle valve SHUT. b. One HPSW Isolating Valve Fitte d Adjacent to the Inductor Panel 1 HPSW valve adjacent to the inductor panel SHUT.2 Three position selector valve set to F OAM Mk 1 or FoamWater selection lever set to FOAM Mk 2. 3 Nozzle valve SHUT.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-16 UK RESTRICTEDc. One HPSW Isolating Valve NOT Adjacent to the Inductor Panel not applicable to Mk 2 1 HPSW isolating valve PINNED OPEN.2 Three position selector valve SHUT.3 Nozzle valve SHUT. 2230. At NBCD State 1, centre feed hose reels are to be de-isolated and pressurised up to the nozzle control valve. 2231. CFHR Operating Instructions Operating instructions and a deck plan showing compartments served are to be displayed adjacent to each CFHR. The CFHR is operated as follows a.First Aid Firefighters 1 Remove the cap from the AFFF dr um and insert the spill pick-up. 2 Open the isolating valve adjacent to the inductor panel.3 Proceed to the location of the fire.4 Direct the nozzle away from the fire and open the nozzle valve.5 When foam is being produced attack the fire.6 The next person on the scene must re-supply AFFF. b.Boundary Cooling. The WATER mode is to be used when boundary cooling. 1 Select WATER position on the selector valve. 2 Proceed to the location requiring boundary cooling.3 Open the nozzle and select ragged spray.4 Boundary cool using the minimum amount of water. c.After Use. Following use the system is to be flushed with water, the isolating valve prior to the inductor panel is to be clos ed and the hose rewound with the nozzle open to allow the hose to drain, the nozzle is then clos ed. Care must be ta ken to rewind the hose in the right direction to avoid kinking at the exit from the drum. g47 g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-17 Change 3 2232. CFHR Nozzle Mounting Pole The procedure, detailed in BR 21704 and in BR 4007, for fighting submarine fires from below requires an operating CFHR nozzle set to the spraywaterwall position to be raisedthrough a hatchway from below. This is ach ieved by mounting the CFHR nozzle on a special pole different from the waterwall nozzle moun ting pole. The standardised design and codification of this device is not yet comp leted. Pending codification, guidance on local manufacture and use of the pole may be obtained from Triumph NBCD School, HMS RALEIGH. 2233. Ramfan The Ramfan see Fig 22-14 is a water turbin e driven, one-man portable, fan. Its purpose is smoke clearance or double bottom venting. It is driven from the HPSW main and will accept any pressure from 2.75 to 12.4 bar 40 to 180 psi vi a a male instantaneous inlet coupling. Water discharge is from a female outlet coupling to be connected, via a Size 3 hose, to any discharge overboard. Air flow is throug h 5 metre lengths of 300mm diameter hose. This hose is rigid across its diameter but collapsible along its axis into half metre high bags, two of which can becarried by one person. A fan set comprises one fan and f our lengths of hose. One set is kept at each FRPP. 2234. Where there is a requirement over and above the capab ility of th e ships ventilation system, to remove smoke from areas adjacent to a fire or remove smoke or fumes after theextinction of a fire, the Ramfan with its associated flexible ducting may be used in the NegativePressure Ventilation NPV mode, ie fan suction, from the vented space. After use, the water turbine should be flushed through w ith fresh water to inhibit corrosion. Fig 22-14. Ramfan 2235. Spare. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-18 UK RESTRICTED 2236. Flooding and Spraying Systems g47 Flooding systems are no longer fitted in ma in magazines but they are fitted to some g47 magazine lockers on the upper deck of ships. A variety of fixed water spray systems are fitted g47 in ships, mainly in magazines, machinery spaces, flammable stowages and aircraft hangars. The g47 following paragraphs give a brie f description of the most common types. Full details are given g47 in class-specific Books of Reference. BR 862 - Naval Magazine and Explosives Regulations g47 gives generic instructions for magazine systems. g47 g47 2237. Manually Operated Spray Systems g47 Each manually operated spray system is supplied with sea water from the HPSW system g47 via an isolating valve, a strainer and a spray valve. The spray valve can be operated from two g47 locations. Open ended sprinklers are normally fitted, although some expl osive lockers have a g47 perforated pipe instead. Some machinery space systems can also be used to spray foam. g47 g47 2238. Automatic Spray Systems g47 Magazine automatic spray systems are permanently charged with fresh water, pressurised g47 by the HPSW system. The spray valve and HPSW isolating valve are both locked open when g47 a magazine contains ammunition. Each spray h ead incorporates a quartzoid bulb which bursts g47 at a predetermined temperature to release the fresh water, followed by sea water from the HPSW g47 system. A water flow alarm with remote indication is fitted to give warning when the system has g47 operated automatically. g47 g47g47g47 g47 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 Fig 22-15. Sprinkler Heads g47 g47 2239. Pressurised Reservoir Systems g47 Magazines which contain a large amount of propellant and high explosive require an g47 automatic system with an instant high flow rate of water. A pressurised fresh water reservoir is g47 therefore fitted to give the initial flow, allowing time for extra HPSW pumps to be started. When g47 one or more of the quartzoid bulbs bursts, wa ter is expelled from the fresh water reservoir by g47 compressed air pressure acting on a r ubber diaphragm bag in the reservoir. g47 g47 g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-19 Change 32240. Rapid Reaction Spray Systems g47 The magazine rapid reaction spray system is a pressurised reservoir system, activated by g47 smoke detection. The pneumatica lly operated spray valve is opene d automatically by a control g47 system. When the spray valve opens, the ships HPSW pumps are automatically started g47 sequentially to provide the required flow. g47 g47 2241. Metron Activated Spray Systems g47 The metron activated spray system has quart zoid bulb spray heads in a pressurised g47 system similar to that described in Para 2238. In addition to the normal activation by g47 temperature, the quartzoid bulbs can also be burst by small charges, initiated by smoke detectors, g47 via a control system. The control system can be switched to manual mode but it is normally left g47 in automatic mode when ammunition is embarked. g47 g47 2242. Spare g47 2243. Hangar Spray Systems g47 Manually operated HPSW spray systems are fitted to aircraft hangars in ships. In larger g47 hangars, such as that in a CVS, the system is divided into separate grids, each with its own spray g47 valve. Great care must be taken to prevent the accumulation of free surface water from hangar g47 spray systems. Hangar scuppers must be kept clear at all times and th ey must be constantly g47 checked when sprays are operated. g47 g47 2244. Dry Risers g47 In some ships, minor compartments such as messdecks are fitted with dry HPSW or g47 foam spray systems. Each system is terminated, outside the protected compartment, in a male g47 instantaneous hose connection protected by a female blanking cap. If no isolating valve is fitted, g47 the blanking cap is to bear the same watertight and gastight control marking as any adjacent g47 doorhatch in the bulkheaddeck through which the system passes. g47 2245. Flight Decks g47 In aircraft carriers an indepe ndent sea water main is run under the flight deck supplied by its own pumps which produce about 7-9 bar pressure to the hydr ants located on the flight deck and on the catwalks. At each hydrant fire point a metal locker provides a degree of protectionfor fire equipment against the weather and downw ash from aircraft. Inside the locker, at the bottom, four 20 litre canisters of AFFF are st owed alongside a 9 litre SP AFFF and a 9 litre SP dry powder extinguisher. A No 3 hose is faked across the top of the AFFF containers and the female end connected to a Foam Making Bran chpipe 1010, the male e nd being routed outside the top of the locker and connected to the inducto r. An additional No 3 hose is also stowed in the locker and is Dutch rolled. A waterwall nozzle stowed in the locker can replace thebranchpipe, providing spray wate rwall if necessary. Fig 22-16 s hows a typical CVS flight deck g47 arrangement.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-20 UK RESTRICTED Fig 22-16. Typical Flight-deck Fire Hydrant Arrangement g47 2246. Dutch Rolling of Hoses g47 On flight decks manned by aircraft handlers, ie on multi-spot decks, spare fire hoses are stowed using the Dutch rolled method. Stowag e and deployment of Dutch rolled hoses is achieved as follows a.Stowing the Hose. Lay the hose out flat. Draw th e female coupling back along the hose length to 1 metre short of the male c oupling. Once the upper layer has been aligned precisely over the lower layer the hose can be rolled up from the bight with the couplingscoming together on the outside of the roll. b.Deploying the Hose. To deploy the hose after removing it from its stowage, it should be held in front of the couplings with one hand supporting the roll of the hose. The hose is then rolled away so that it unco ils itself leaving a loop of hose on the deck. The male coupling can then be attached to the pumphydranthose and the femalecoupling taken towards the fire. c.Stowing Dutch Rolled Hose. The Dutch rolled hose will stow as shown in Fig 22-17. g47 Note. The Dutch rolled hose method is only to be used on flight decks. Its use between decks, in any ship, is prohibited.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-21 Change 3 Fig 22-17. Dutch Rolled Hose g47 2247. Flight Deck Monitor g47 The flight deck monitor is used to project fo am onto the area of an aircraft landing spot. The type of monitor varies between ship classes the automatic oscillating type is illustrated atFig 22-18. In this type, a Pelton wheel water motor, using a small amount of HPSW, provides g47 the power for oscillation. The frequency of osc illation is dependent on HPSW supply pressure, but it is typically eight cycles per second at 7 bar. The range of oscillation and nozzle elevation are set during installation, but must be confirmed by a full functional check if adjusted duringmaintenance work. When not in use, the monitor is to be set in the automatic oscillating mode,with the nozzle centred. Monitors which do not have the automatic oscillating mode must betraversed and elevated manually. Monitors are supplied with 1 AFFF, the concentrate being stored in a dedicated tank.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 22-22 UK RESTRICTEDFig 22-18. Automatic Oscillating Monitor g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-1 Change 3CHAPTER 23 FIREFIGHTING, APPLIANCES AND INSTALLATIONS CONTENTS Para P o r t a b l e a n d M o b i l e E q u i p m e n t ........................................ 2301 Stored Pressure Extinguisher AFFF SPEAFFF - Pre 2003 Model .......... 2303 g47 Stored Pressure Extinguisher Dry Powder SPEDP - Pre 2003 Model ........ 2305 g47 SPE Pressurization Arrangements - Pre 2003 Models ........................ 2306 R e c h a r g i n g t h e S P E P o r t a b l e A i r C h a r g i n g A s s e m b l y ....................... 2307 9 Litre Stored Pressure Extinguisher AFFF - Post 2003 Model ............... 2308 g47 9 kg Stored Pressure Extinguishe r Dry Powder - Post 2003 Model ............ 2312 g47 S P E M a i n t e n a n c e.................................................... 2315 g47 M i s u s e o f S t o r e d P r e s s u r e E x t i n g u i s h e r s.................................. 2316 g47 M a r i n i s e d 2 k g D r y P o w d e r E x t i n g u i s h e r.................................. 2317 g47 2 kg CO2 E x t i n g u i s h e r ................................................ 2319 g47 M a r k i n g o f P o r t a b l e F i r e E x t i n g u i s h e r s................................... 2321 g47 M o b i l e F o a m U n i t S F 9 0 .............................................. 2322 g47 10kg CO2 E x t i n g u i s h e r ............................................... 2324 g47 Aqueous Film Forming Foam AFFF .................................... 2326 T e s t i n g o f A F F F..................................................... 2329 F r e e z e P r o t e c t i o n o f 6 A F F F ......................................... 2330 T h e r m a l I m a g i n g C a m e r a T I C ........................................ 2332 g47 F o a m I n l e t T u b e s .................................................... 2336 g47 G a s e o u s F i r e f i g h t i n g S y s t e m s .......................................... 2338 g47 S m o k e C o n t a i n m e n t C u r t a i n s .......................................... 2341 S m o k e G e n e r a t i n g T r a i n i n g D e v i c e s ..................................... 2343 S m o k e G e n e r a t i n g M a c h i n e............................................ 2344 G e n e r a t o r s S m o k e T r a i n i n g G S T N 5 a n d N 6 ............................. 2345BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-3 Change 3CHAPTER 23 FIREFIGHTING, APPLIANCES AND INSTALLATIONS 2301. Portable and Mobile Equipment This Chapter deals with portable and mob ile appliances and equipments, and fixed firefighting appliances and installations other than those associated with the HP sea water system.The latter are dealt with in Chapter 22. 2302. There are several types of portable first ai d appliances for hand use, provided for attacking fire in its early stages. If tackled promptly, most fires can be extinguished by suchappliances, but it is important to realize their limitations and to prepare adequate back-up should they fail. It should be noted that whenever a gas or solid eg CO 2 or dry powder is expelled under pressure from an extinguisher, electrosta tic charges may be generated. The occasions when such charges assume the capability of causing electric shock to the user are rare they varyaccording to circumstances and, in any cas e, are usually only of a minor nature. EVERYONE MUST KNOW WHERE TO FIND AND HOW TO USE THE RIGHT TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER FOR ANY SORT OF FIRE. 2303. Stored Pressure Extinguisher A FFF SPEAFFF - Pre 2003 Model g47 The SPEAFFF is a first aid firefighting appliance, suitable for attacking all types of fire. It delivers a stream of AFFF by a simple seize and squeeze controllable discharge whichwill last for a total of 50 sec onds when charged to 10 bar. The pre 2003 model is readily g47 identifiable by the polished finish of its stai nless steel shell and red usage instructions. a.Instructions Regarding Use. For more detailed information than is contained in these paragraphs, BR 6592014 - Fire Extinguis her, Foam, Stored Pressure, Nine Litre Type, should be referred to. 1 Applicability. This extinguisher is suitable for fighting all fires, both those involving solid materials Class A fires and those involving liquid fuels Class B fires. 2 Method of Use. It is brought into use by withdrawing the safety pin from the discharge head assembly and then depr essing the operating handle whilst pointing the nozzle in the direction of the fire and playing foam over it, using a flat figure of eight motion to achieve complete coverage, as quickly as possible. Releasing theoperating lever will stop the flow of foam and allow it to be redirected elsewhere,should it be needed, without wastage. 3 Use Against Electrical Fire. This extinguisher is safe to use against low voltage fires providing the nozzle is at least 1.8 metres from the source of power. g47 It must not be used on voltages above 400 V ac or 800 V dc. 4 Care After Use. Carry out the recharging routine below.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-4 UK RESTRICTED 5 Stowage. These extinguishers are sited around the ship in accordance with the ships firefighting arrangement drawing, and adjacent to FRPP lockers. A stowagesuitable for the compressed air rechargi ng bottle is provided adjacent to FRPP lockers. CAUTION INSTRUCTIONS ON THE SP EAFFF ARE IN RED THOSE ON THE SPEDP ARE IN BLUE. Fig 23-1. SPEAFFF - Pre 2003 Fig 23-2. SPEDP - Pre 2003 g47 b.Recharging Arrangements. The extinguisher is to be recharged with fresh waterAFFF solution as follows 1 Invert the extinguisher and squeeze th e operating lever to vent any residual pressure. 2 Unscrew the discharge head assemb ly, complete with the syphon tube, and withdraw it from the shell. 3 Wash out the inside of the she ll thoroughly with clean, fresh water.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-5 Change 34 Pour 8.6 litres of clean, fresh water in to the extinguisher using the syphon tube as a dipstick. The correct amount of wate r is indicated when it reaches the end of the syphon tube and the measuring shoulder, which projects out from the side of the syphon tube, is resting on the lip at the top of the extinguisher. Using a 500 mlgraduated acrylic AFFF measuring cylinde r, top up the extinguisher with 0.4 litres of 6 AFFF, making the contents 9 litres. Notes 1. In some extinguishers the measuring shoulder is replaced by a letter F. 2. Should sea water ever be used to fill the extinguisher in an emergency, the extinguisher is to be well rinsed out imme diately after use with clean fresh water, otherwise corrosion of the extinguisher body will occur. Refill with clean, fresh water and AFFF solution as above. 5 When the solution level is correct, replace the discharge head assembly and HAND tighten. Note. A thin film of petroleum grease is to be applied to the Head Seating O Ring before replacing the head assembly. 6 Raise the operating lever to its non-ope rational position, insert the safety pin and retain it by fitting a Helle rman rubber sleeve to the end of the pin. Fit an anti- tamper tag through the pull end of the pin and around the operating lever. 7 Reset the USED indicator.8 Remove the air charging valve dust cap and connect the compressed air supply to the charging valve. 9 Charge the extinguisher until 10 bar pressure is indicated on the gauge.Notes 1 If a mix of prepost 2003 extinguishers ar e held, care must be taken to avoid g47 over-pressurisation to 15 bar. g47 g47 2 If a tyre inflator or a foot pump is used, pressure will not exceed 7 bar see g47 Para 2306.b and c. g47 10 Disconnect the air supply and replace th e air charging valve dust cap. Release air supply as described in the note to Para 2306.b. 11 Check for signs of leakage around the discharge head with the extinguisher in an upright position.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-6 UK RESTRICTED12 Stow and secure the extinguisher, a nd house the nozzle, using the arrangement provided. 2304. Spare. 2305. Stored Pressure Exting uisher Dry Powder SPEDP - Pre 2003 Model g47 The pre 2003 model can be identified by the po lished stainless steel shell and blue usage g47 instructions. This extinguisher is provided near to, or in, the accesses to some machinery spaces, g47 in the flight deck area and in hangars for fighting liquid fuel fires. It is especially useful forfighting liquid fuelled pressure spray fires. Th e discharge from this app liance can be controlled by means of the operating lever which can be re leased whilst it is redirected, thus preventing wastage. The total discharge time is about 20 seconds when charged to 10 bar. The SPEDP should be recharged with dry powder in a dry compartment as follows a. Ensure the extinguisher is fully discharged.b. Remove the discharge head assembly, clean off all powder residues with a soft brush. c. Clean the Schraeder valve assembly, if necessary removing the valve core.d. Clean out the cylinder using a soft brush, en suring the inside of the cylinder is dry. Particular attention is to be paid to the threads and joint sealing faces. e. Using a suitable chute as a funnel, pour the contents of one 11.2 kg 25lb bag of powder into the cylinder. WARNING PROLONGED EXPOSURE TO THE POWDER MAY CAUSE IRRITATION TO SKIN OR EYES. WHEN HANDLING THE POWDER WEAR A DUSTMASK AND GOGGLES f. Check cleanliness and absence of powder from the screw threads and joint faces, then re-fit the head assembly. g. Pressurise with DRY air to 10 bar from the portable charging assembly, via the Schraeder valve. Note. Do not use a foot pump or LP air in this the SPEDP application. The air must be dry. 2306. SPE Pressurization Arra ngements - Pre 2003 Models g47 Wherever possible the extinguishers are to be charged to 10 bar, the working pressure indicated within the black segment on the extinguisher pressure gauge. The performance of theextinguisher at 7 bar is, however, acceptable, being only marginally reduced from theperformance at 10 bar. Therefore, when using th e tyre inflator or foot pump, a 7 bar charge is acceptable, although the pressure gauge will not indicate a full charge. Pressurisation of the extinguisher may be carried out usingUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-7 Change 3 a.Portable Air Charging Assembly. This assembly consists of a 1,240 litre free air capacity, steel, high pressure BASCCA air cylinder, fitted with a regulator valve,pressure gauges and discharge hose terminating in a connection which will mate withthe air charging connection on the extinguisher see Fig 23-3. The assembly is alsofitted with a carrying handle and wind ar ound hose stowage. The air cylinder is charged to a maximum pressure of 207 bar and will charge the extinguisher to 10 bar. WARNING GOGGLES AND EAR DEFENDERS ARE TO BE WORN WHEN CHARGING SPE WITH COMPRESSED AIR. CAUTION g47 THE REDUCING VALVE ON THE AIR CHARGE ASSEMBLY MUST BE SET AT 10 BAR FOR THE PRE 2003 SPE TO AVOID OVER-PRESSURSATION. g47 Fig 23-3. Portable Air Charging Assembly b.Low Pressure Air System. When charging from the ships low pressure air system using the tyre inflator, connect the inflator to a convenient low pressure air connection, eg tool point, by a suitable flexible hose and end connecti ons. Position the extinguisher so that the air charging valve at the back of the discharge head is readily accessible.Holding the tyre inflator in one hand and th e end charging connection in the other, place the end charging connection firmly against the air charging valve. Depress the leversufficiently to allow the pressure on the tyre inflator to reach at least 7 bar. When thisis reached remove the end charging connection from the air charging valve. Note. In order to prevent the possible disc harge of the AFFF solution through the air charging valve when disconnecting the inflator, keep the operating trigger on theinflator depressed until disconnection of the c harging connection is completed. This will keep the air charging valve pressurized so preventing the possible syphoning of the AFFF solution back through the valve.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-8 UK RESTRICTEDFig 23-4. Tyre Inflator c.Foot Pump. The method of charging the extinguisher using the foot pump is self evident in that the pump discharge hose is connected direct to the extinguisher chargingconnection. The pressure to be achieved in the extinguisher, using the foot pump is 7 bar. The foot pump is never to be used with the SPEDry Powder dry air only may be used. Note. Overpressurizing. In the event that an extinguisher is accidentally overcharged, especially when using the method in Para 2306.a, the excess pressure should bereleased by standing the extinguisher upright and releasing the excess pressure by depressing the valve stem insi de the air charging connection. 2307. Recharging the SPE Portab le Air Charging Assembly The compressed air cylinder is to be recharged from a 207 bar air charging panel, if fitted, or from the ships usual charging facilities ashore. To fill the compressed air cylinder fromthe BA panel the following procedure should be adopted a. Ensure that all valves on the charging panel are shut.b. Open the charging panel pressure gaug e stop valve on the 207 bar charging line to vent any pressure that might be remaining in the circuit. c. Remove the blanking cap from the charging panel 207 bar outlet. d. Open the main air supply valve and crack open the 207 bar outlet valve to blow any dirt out of the line. e. Remove the regulator and hose assembly from the air charging cylinder, first ensuring that the cylinder valve is shut.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-9 Change 3f. Connect the compressed air cylinder, through the charging hose and adaptor, to the charging panel 207 bar outlet. WARNING THE SPE AIR CHARGING ASSEMBLY USES A BASCCA CYLINDER WHICH MUST NOT BE CHARGED TO MORE THAN 207 BAR. g. Open the cylinder valve and then open the charging panel 207 bar outlet valve enough to charge the cylinder to 207 bar at a compara tively slow rate. This avoids overheating the air passing into the cylinder. h. When charging is complete, shut the cyli nder valve, shut the charging outlet valve and shut the main supply valve. i. Disconnect the cylinder, charging hose and adaptor from the charging panel.j. Replace the blanking cap on the 207 bar outlet connection.k. Replace the regulator and hose assembly on the air charging cylinder.Note. In ships without a 207 bar charging panel, the 205 bar SABA diving BA panel should be used. 2308. 9 Litre Stored P ressure Extinguisher A FFF - Post 2003 Model g47 The model of 9 litre SPEAFFF introduced in 2003 can be recognised by a red painted g47 shell and a cream coloured band to indicate the foam contents. It is used on solid or liquid fires. g47 It has a working charge pressure of 15 bar, so it can only be charged by the portable air charging g47 assembly or from the LP air system, not by a f oot pump. When fully charged to 15 bar it has a g47 throw of 6 metres and a discharge time of 38 s econds. There are two versions standard and non- g47 magnetic. g47 g47 Fig 23-5. 9 Litre SPEAFFF - Post 2003BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-10 UK RESTRICTED2309. To operate the pos t 2003 9 litre SPEAFFF g47 g47 a. Hold the extinguisher upright. g47 g47 b. Pull out the safety pin the plastic dart will break. g47 g47 c. Free the discharge hose and aim the nozzle to drop foam onto the fire from a g47 minimum distance of one metre. g47 g47 d. Squeeze the levers. g47 2310. To recharge the post 2003 9 litre SPEAFFF g47 g47 a. Remove the safety pin, if fitted. Invert the extinguisher and squeeze the operating g47 levers to vent an y residual pressure. g47 g47 b. Slacken the headcap by rotating it two complete turns and listen for any residual g47 pressure. Do not use a hammer on the handle, lever or pressure gauge. Do not unscrew g47 further until all residual pressure has dissipated. g47 g47 c. Remove the head and syphon tube assembly. g47 g47 d. Empty the residual contents and rinse out the extinguisher with fresh water. g47 e. Fill the extinguisher with fresh water to the F line level indicator on the siphon g47 tube. g47 g47 f. Pour in a 560 ml charge of 6 AFFF concen trate. Do not overfill or mix with other g47 foam types. g47 g47 g. Check the actuation of all moving parts of the head and the condition of the neck g47 ring. Check that the siphon tube is clear of obstruction. g47 g47 h. Lightly grease the O seals, moving part s and neck threads with petroleum jelly. g47 g47 i. Screw on the head assembly and tighten it hand tight. g47 g47 j. Fit the safety pin and insert a plastic dart through the end. g47 g47 k. Pressurise the extinguisher with air to 15 bar the white line on the gauge, using the g47 portable air charging assembly or the LP air system and a tyre inflator. Replace the dust g47 cap on the schrader valve. g47 2311. If the safety pin is missing, or the plastic dart is missing or broken, the extinguisher must g47 be checked for the correct fill and recharge d, if necessary. The post 2003 9 litre SPEAFFF g47 must be returned and replaced if any of any of the following conditions occur g47 g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-11 Change 3a. Significant dents or damage to the shell. g47 g47 b. Damage to the gauge or any extin guisher component, which renders it g47 unserviceable. g47 g47 c. Significant signs of corrosion. g47 g47 d. Every fifth year after the date brought into service. g47 2312. 9 kg Stored Pressure Extinguish er Dry Powder - Post 2003 Model g47 The model of 9 kg SPEDP introduced in 2003 can be recognised by a red painted shell g47 and a blue coloured band to indi cate the powder contents. It is used on solid or liquid fires and g47 is particularly effective for liquid fuel pressu re spray fires. It may be used on low voltage g47 electrical fires must not be used on live HV systems. It has a throw of 6 metres and a discharge g47 time of 15 seconds. It is supplied with a 15 bar n itrogen charge and it is not to be recharged in g47 shipsunits. There are two vers ions standard and non-magnetic. g47 Fig 23-6. 9 kg SPEDP - Post 2003 g47 g47 2313. To operate the post 2003 9 kg SPEDP g47 g47 a. Hold the extinguisher upright. g47 g47 b. Pull out the safety pin the plastic dart will break. g47 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-12 UK RESTRICTEDc. Free the discharge hose and aim at the base of the fire, from a minimum distance of g47 one metre. g47 g47 d. Squeeze the levers. g47 2314. If the safety pin is missing, or the plastic dart is missing or broken, the charge pressure g47 and weight must be checked. The post 2003 9 kg SPEDP must be returned and replaced if any g47 of the following conditions occur g47 g47 a. Partial or complete discharge. g47 g47 b. Loss of pressure ie when the gauge n eedle has moved out of the green sector. g47 g47 c. Loss of weight gross weig ht is approximately 12.8 kg. g47 d. Significant dents or damage to the shell. g47 g47 e. Damage to the gauge or any extinguisher component, which renders it g47 unserviceable. g47 g47 f. Significant signs of corrosion. g47 g47 g. Every fifth year after the date brought into service. g47 2315. SPE Maintenance g47 This equipment is to be maintained in accordance with the MMS. The list of spares g47 which are required to keep the SPE in good wo rking order will be found in BR 21703. They are considered to be minor items for which the extinguisher need not be returned to store forrepair. These extinguishers are not to be painted. 2316. Misuse of Stored Pressure Extinguishers g47 Fire extinguishers are only provided to attack and extinguish fires and in no circumstances are they to be used for any other purpose. 2317. Marinised 2kg Dry Powder Extinguisher The marinised 2 kg dry powder extinguisher s ee Fig 23-7 is supplied for use in small craft using outboard motors. The extinguisher, which has a dedicated m ounting bracket, has a 2kg charge of dry powder and is pr essurised by nitrogen at 15 bar. This marinised version of the extinguisher is manufactured from corrosion-resistan t materials, and should not be confused with the 2 kg dry powder extinguisher supplied for use ashore. To operate the extinguisher a. Hold upright. Pull out the pin.b. Aim at the base of the fire, from a distance of at least 1 metre.c. Squeeze the levers.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-13 Change 3WARNING ALTHOUGH THE DRY POWDER IS NON-TOXIC, THIS EXTINGUISHER IS NOT TO BE DIRECTED AT PERSONNEL Fig 23-7. Marinised 2 kg Dry Powder Extinguisher g47 2318. On initial receipt, the pressure gauge is to be checked to ensure that it is reading in the green charged sector. The extinguisher should be weighed and the weig ht indelibly marked on the Inspection Record embossed on the rear. An extinguisher, excluding the mounting bracket,should weigh approximately 3.6 kg. The extin guishers are to be checked weekly for serviceabilty, ensuring that the seal on the safe ty pin is intact and no loss of pressure has occurred. At six monthly intervals they are to be shaken to prevent compaction of the powder,weighed and the nozzle checked clear. No a ttempt should be made to recharge these extinguishers onboard they are to be returned and repl aced if any of the following conditions occur a. Part or complete discharge.b. Loss of pressure ie gauge out of green sector.c. Loss of weight.d. Significant damage to the shell, damaged gauge, etc.e. Significant corrosion.f. Every fourth year after introducti on into service for refurbishment.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-14 UK RESTRICTED2319. 2 kg CO2 Extinguisher g47 The 2kg CO2 extinguishers is coloured red with a black identifying band around the g47 cylinder. It consists of a cylinde r containing 2 kg of liquified CO2 at a pressure of 58 bar at 20C g47 and is normally fitted with a rigid discharge horn. Ther e are two versions normal and non- g47 magnetic. To operate the extinguisher, remove the safety pin, the plastic dart will break, hold g47 the extinguisher by the squeeze-grip release valve and press the trigger of the grip very firmly toensure a full discharge and to avoid the risk of freeze-up at the orifice. The discharge time isabout eight seconds. The horn should be directed at the base of th e fire from as near as possible. g47 WARNING DO NOT GRIP THE HORN OR THE CYLINDER DURING USE IT WILL FREEZE THE HAND AND MAY CAUSE BURNS . 2320. CO 2 extinguishers provided in compartments c ontaining electrical equipment eg radar g47 cabinets, are fitted with a flexible hose and bayonet plug. The plug fits into inlet sockets on g47 electronic cabinets. The socket has a breakable membrane which ruptures when the plug on the extinguisher hose is inserted. For use on open e quipment and elsewhere in the compartment the hose is fitted with a detachable hand applicator, which fits over the plug, designed to preventhand contact with the end of the hose. The extinguisher is normally stowed with the handapplicator fitted. A relatively cool stowage position is required for these extinguishers. No g47 attempt must be made by any individual or shipunit representative to remove the discharge valve g47 from the extinguisher. If the safety pin is missi ng, or the plastic dart is missing or broken, the g47 weight must be checked. The 2 kg CO 2 extinguisher must be returned and replaced if any of the g47 following conditions occur g47 g47 a. Partial or complete discharge. g47 g47 b. Damage to the gauge or any part of th e extinguisher which renders it unserviceable. g47 g47 c. Significant signs of corrosion. g47 g47 d. Every fifth year after the date brought into service. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-15 Change 3 Fig 23-8a. 2kg CO2 Extinguisher g47 with Discharge HornFig 23-8b. 2kg CO2 Extinguisher g47 with Flexible Hose 2321. Marking of Portab le Fire Extinguishers g47 a.Extinguishers. All extinguishers are to be marked with 25mm 1 inch Black numbers using a permanent marker as shown below Fig 23-9a. Stored Pressure Exti nguisher Fig 23-9b. 2 kg CO2 Extinguisher g47 These markings can be removed, without causing abrasive damage, using Propanol Ampex, see BR 21703 applied with a soft cloth. ALL THESE POSITIONAL g47 MARKINGS MUST BE REMOVED PRIOR TO THE EXTINGUISHER BEINGRETURNED TO STORES.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-16 UK RESTRICTED b.Stowages 1 All extinguisher stowages are to be identified by a red triangle on the structure directly above the stowage position. Thes e can be painted or are available from Naval Stores NSN listed in BR 21703. 2 The triangles should ha ve outside dimensions of 115mm 4.5 inch per side and a 7mm 0.25 inch border. Correspondi ng type and number of the associated extinguisher is to be painted or marked in the triangle with 13mm 0.5 inch Black lettering, as example below. Fig 23-9c. Fire Extinguisher Stowage g47 2322. Mobile Foam Unit SF90 g47 This is for use against flightdeck or hangar fu el fires in some ships. It is designed for rapid action to gain time while th e main firefighting system is be ing brought into operation. The unit carries 90 litres of 6 per cen t AFFFfresh water solu tion, mounted on a trolley. It has a hose and a branchpipe with an onoff control valve. Discharge pressure is provided by an air cylinder mounted on the foam tank. The disc harge hose is dutch rolled in its stowage basket. The unit discharges in about 56 seconds and has a thro w of 15 to 18 metres. To operate the unit a. Roll out the hose towards the fireb. Open the valve on the air cylinde r to pressurise the foam tank. c. Open the nozzle-control valve and direct the jet to fall lightly on to the burning liquid. Note. A fixed version of this unit is fitted in the machinery spaces of some RFAs and submarines and in this application it is known as the SFU90 see BR 21704. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-17 Change 3 Fig 23-10. Mobile Foam Unit SF90 2323. The SF90 and SFU 90 extinguishers are re-charged after use as follows g47 WARNINGS 1. DO NOT REMOVE ANY FITTINGS UNTIL ALL INTERNAL PRESSURE HAS BEEN RELEASED FROM THE STORAGE CONTAINER. 2. IF A DEDICATED 123 BAR CHARGING SUPPLY IS NOT AVAILABLE, GREAT CARE MUST BE TAKEN TO AVOID OVER PRESSURISATION OF THEAIR BOTTLE. a. Ensure the air cylinder valve is shut. b. De-pressurise the AFFF container tank via the pressure release valve.c. Disconnect the foam discharge hose from the AFFF container and flush with fresh water. d. Re-connect the foam discharge hose to the AFFF container.e. Stow the foam discharge hose.f. Unscrew the filler cap assembly and remove.g. If completely discharged, fill the container with clean fresh water to within 150mm of the filling hole sealing face. Slowly add 5 litres of AFFF liquid concentrate and stir to ensure a constant mix. Top up to 100mm from the sealing face with fresh water.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-18 UK RESTRICTEDh. If the unit has been partially discharge d, top up with a prepared AFFF solution of 85 litres of clean fresh water and 5 litres of 6 AFFF liquid con centrate, to within 100mm of the filling hole sealing face. i. Check the filler cap gasket is not dama ged and in place and replace the filler cap hand tight. j. Disconnect the air cylinder from the pressure regulator, release the cylinder retaining strap and remove the air cylinder. k. Charge the air cylinder to 123 bar.l. Replace the air cylinder, secure the re taining strap and re -connect the pressure regulator to the air cylinder. m. Check all connections are tight.Notes 1. In an emergency, when fresh water is not available the unit can be recharged using sea water to enable it to be prepared for imme diate use. At the earliest opportunity after being charged with sea water the unit is to be emptied and the storage container and hoses flushed with clean fresh water to prevent corrosion and salt deposit build up. 2. The unit is not to be left charge d with sea water for long periods. 2324. 10 kg CO 2 Extinguisher g47 The trolley-mounted 10 kg CO2 extinguisher see Fig 23-11 is provided for dealing with g47 fire during the starting of aircraft engines. The apparatus comprises a trolley-mounted cylinder, containing 10 kg of liquified CO2, connected by flexible hose to a telescopic applicator. The applicator may be extended up to 3.6 metres and the length se t by turning the knurled locking collar. A horn is normally fitted over the discharge nozzle for use in the open, but this isunscrewed and removed if the nozzle is to be inse rted into an engine access panel. Discharge of a fully charged cylinder lasts between 30 and 40 s econds. Detailed instruc tions are contained in Air Publication 957. 2325. To operate the extinguisher g47 a. Place the trolley in the upright position.b. Open the cylinder discharge valve.c. Remove the applicator from the trolley and extend to the required length. Lock the applicator adjustment to preven t it extending under gas pressure. d. Position the discharge nozzle through an engine bay fire access panel, etc.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-19 Change 3e. Squeeze the applicator control valve to release the gas. The operator should be prepared for jet reaction on discharge, especi ally if the applicator is fully extended. WARNING AFTER DISCHARGE, THE APPLICATOR EXTENSION TUBE WILL BE EXTREMELY COLD AND SHOULD NOT BE DIRECTLY HANDLED Fig 23-11. 10 kg CO2 Extinguisher 2326. Aqueous Film Forming Foam A FFF AFFF is a synthetic, non-toxi c, foam-forming liquid base d on flouro-chemical wetting agents designed for use with fresh or sea water. It produces an aqueous film to float out over thesurface of a burning fuel, forming a vapour seal which extinguishes fire and prevents reflash. This sealing action will also take place on fuel sp illages, thus securing them from ignition. AFFF can be used in conjunction with other firefightin g agents used in HM ships, without impairment of its efficiency. It is as effective against solid fuel fires as it is agai nst liquid fuel fires and, in each case, should be sprayed directly over the fi re to achieve complete coverage as quickly as possible. Firefighting systems using AFFF should only be supplied with undiluted neat AFFFexcept when freeze protection is added - see Para 2330. 2327. There are two types of AFFF used in HM ships, 6 and 1. These figures indicate the percentage of AFFF concentrate that is mixed with water at the inductor. The 1 AFFF istherefore a stronger concentrate than the 6 AFFF. The two types are used as follows a. 6 AFFF is used in 9 litre stored pressure extinguishers, SF90 and SFU90 extinguishers, FBU5X and FB1010 branchpipes. This is supplied in 20 litre drums.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-20 UK RESTRICTEDb. 1 AFFF is used in flight deck monitors and in some hangar and vehicle deck spray systems see specification for individual ships. This is also supplied in 20 litre drums. 2328. On receipt of the AFFF drums, the caps should be eased so that when required for use they may be opened by hand. Extreme care should be taken to prevent breaking of the sealing wire, so ensuring that the quality and nature of the contents is preserved. If necessary, the red plastic security seals, listed in BR 21703, may be used. Different batches of the same concentration may be mixed, but the shelf-life of the olde st batch must be assumed. 2329. Testing of AFFF AFFF has a shelf-life of 20 years. If the qua lity of opened containers is suspected, details of testing procedures are available from WSAMFFM5, who can be contacted on Foxhill extension 82386. 2330. Freeze Protection of 6 AFFF 6 AFFF concentrate is liable to temporary thickening when exposed to temperatures g47 below 2C. This could affect the pick-up of th e concentrate by an inductor. AFFF stowed in exposed positions in cold climates, eg unheated stowage on jetties, on upper decks of ships or on submarine casings, may be freeze protected by the addition of 24 ethy lene glycol, which will give protection down to -10C. Drums of AFFF which have been thus treated must be clearlymarked Freeze protected by 24 ethylene glycol to avoid confusion with untreated AFFF, and are not to be put in between-deck stowages. 2331. Dilution by ethylene glycol will affect the performance of AFFF, so it is only to be added in exceptional climatic conditions, eg Upkeep Pe riods, when no heated st owages are available. 2332. Thermal Imaging Camera TIC These are issued to HM Ships, Submarines and RFAs to the scale of allowances given in BR 2170 Volume 3 for surface ships and Volume 4 for submarines. a.Purpose. The TIC is a battery operated, hand-held, device incorporating a miniature viewing screen, and is for use as a firefighting aid to give thermal picturesthrough dense smoke where normal vision is impossible. The TIC will provide 1 The operator with a clear vision throug h dense smoke and an indication of the source of the fire. 2 Improve safety of the firefighters by making obstacles and other hazards visible. 3 A possible reduction in search and rescue time.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-21 Change 3 b.Description. The TIC is illustrated in Fig 23-12. The latest type of TIC is smaller g47 and lighter than the original model with a pistol grip handle and the battery pack and voltage stabilizer contained se parate from the camera. The latter unit is hung around the neck of the operator or attached by means of snap hooks to his BA harness. Although the latest type of TIC has a different Naval Stores pattern number from the original, both types of camera may be issued against either pattern number. When a large TIC isreturned to store for repair it will be replaced with a miniaturised TIC. therefore all large TICs will essentially become obsolete. 1 For training purposes ten Ni Cad E ver Ready AN 50 batteries are supplied which, when in good condition and fully charged, provide a camera operating time of about 45 minutes and must al ways be re-charged after use. 2 For operational use, Duracell MN 1500 batteries are specifi ed. These should be fitted to the TIC when in its stowage, bearing in mind that battery performancewill be adversely affected if they are fitted incorrectly or for too long. When theTIC is used for training purposes the Ni Ca d batteries should be used to replace the Duracells. c.Shortcomings. Shortcomings in the operation of this equipment in realistic firefighting conditions include 1 Discrimination. In training scenarios, using synthetic smoke, objects and people are invariably clearly defined due to adequate temperature differentials. Real smoke will almost certainly be accompanied by varying degrees of heat which can create difficult conditions for TICs. Eff ects vary but include poor definition of objects, inability to see people effectively and whiteout where only relativelycool objects are seen as dark shadows. 2 Lock. If a TIC is suddenly presented to a very high temper ature flame, outside the protection of a waterwall, then the automatic iris control may have insufficienttime to close. In this circumstance an over temperature exposure of the tube mayoccur and, in self protection, the TIC lo cks itself and leaves blurred, confusing images in the viewfinder. Recovery from this condition is made by switching the camera off and on again, thus effectively resetting the internal circuitry. Fig 23-12. Thermal Imaging Camera g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-22 UK RESTRICTED3 The TICs are fitted with five light emitting diodes LEDs to the left of the camera viewing screen which indicates battery condition and use-time remaining.The time remaining as each LED is extinguished is, approximately LED TIME 1 30 mins 2 15 mins 3 10 mins Duracell batteries only4 5 mins 5 2 mins c.Instructions for Use. The TIC is to be stowed c omplete with 10 Duracell batteries fitted at FRPPs for ships with, or less than, 1 DC sections, and at the section bases ofships with more than 1 DC sections. 1 When TICs are used for training purposes the Duracell batteries are to be replaced by the Ni Cad Batteries. The latter batteries are to be re-chargedimmediately after use. 2 The original TIC must be fitted with its visor, on receipt, using the retaining screws provided. 3 The TIC can be connected to a TV monitor and used to provide a remote picture of the firedamage scene, as seen by the operator, when used for training. d.Maintenance. Onboard internal re pairs or adjustments are not to be undertaken. Defective TICs are to be returned having previously been tested with new batteries toStores, giving details of the fault. e.Special Precautions. TICs are expensive and care must be taken when being transported and when in stowage. They s hould be stowed securely at a temperature between 15 and 35C and not more than 70 humidity. 2333-2335. Spare. 2336. Foam Inlet Tubes These are fitted in machinery spaces to enab le AFFF foam to be delivered direct into the bilges, by means of an FB5X branchpipe, from positions outside the spaces. The tops of thetubes are to be fitted with blanking caps identified and these caps must be screwed down tightlywhen not in use to preserve watertight and gastight integrity. The upper portion of the tube protruding through the deckbulkhead is to be painted signal red, the remainder being painted to suit the compartment decor and identified with red tape marked FOAM. Adjacent to the top ofthe inlet tube a notice is to be provided w hite lettering on a red background stating FOAM TUBE, compartment served and the maximum amount of AFFF solution necessary when fighting a fire via the foam tube. This may be calculated as follows The water consumption ofthe FB5X, as indicated on the branch pipe, is 225 ltrmin at 5.5 bar, consumption of AFFF istherefore 13.5 ltrmin 225 x 6 per cent and allowing an expansion factor of 10 the foam produces is 2,250 ltrsmin. From this it can be shown that to produce a layer of foam 100mmdeep experience has shown that an average depth of 100mm is required to produce a minimum depth of 50mm in a compartment L metres long, W metres wide and having N foam inlets will require 0.03 LWN 20 litre containers at each foam inlet. On current major warships this approximates to two 20 litre containers at each foam inlet.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-23 Change 32337 Spare. 2338. Gaseous Firefighting Systems These are dealt with in Chapter 21. g47 2339-2340. Spare. 2341. Smoke Containment Curtains Smoke curtains are fitted at main watertight doors to sub- divide passageways to enable smoke boundaries to be maintained in the even t of distortion of doors structure or for passage of personnel. They are manufactured from Columbus 300 flame reta rdant fabr ic. Canopy arrangements are provided at doors to form a mini airlock about 1 metre by 1 metre on the non door side of the bulkhead. Pelme t curtain rail, with well rounded corners to allow easy curtain movement, follows the form of the airlock. Curtains are fitted in two parts with an overlap.Reflective tape is fitted to the edges of the smoke curtains to allow the access to be rapidly identified, thus reducing the time taken to pass through. Curtains must be checked to ensure that a. Curtains have an overlap of between 600 and 700mm.b. Pelmets fitted for the sub division of passageways hang both sides of the curtain to a depth of 225mm. c. Curtains have a lead weight st rips sewn in 50mm from the deck. d. Curtains touch the deck to form a smoke tight seal. e. Internal and external edges of curtains have reflective tape fitted. 2342. Smoke containment curtains are susceptible to considerable wear, chaffing and snagging from the passage of personnel and e quipments when left in the rigged position. In order to retain the effectiveness and integrity of the curtains the following procedures are to be adopted a.State 1. Curtains are to be fully rigged and checked for defects, they are then to be restowed. Defects are to be rectified as soon as possible. b.States 2 and 3. Curtains are to remain stowed. c. In the event of a real fire or smoke generated for exercise purposes the curtains are to be rigged as soon as possible to establish the smoke boundary. Note. Columbus 300 flame retardant fabric is available from Naval Stores to allow curtain repair or the manufacture of ad-hoc smoke curtains see BR 21703.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-24 UK RESTRICTED2343. Smoke Generating Training Devices Two types of smoke generator are available as firefightingsearch and rescue team training aids, smoke generating m achines and generators, smoke training. They allow realistic exercise of breathing apparatus, thermal imaging cameras and NBCD communicationstechniques and enhance training in smoke control and clearance. 2344. Smoke Generating Machine This is a 115 V, 60 Hz electrically power ed device known as the Minimist Turbo Smoke Generator. This operates on a 115V 60Hz electrical supply, pr oducing smoke at 125 m 3min. A pressurised cannister contains smoke fluid and a pressurising agent. An operating manual is supplied with each machine. 2345. Generators Smoke Training GST N5 and N6 These are pyrotechnic, cinnamic acid devices which will quickly fill compartments 50m3 for the N5, 90m3 for the N6 with a dense white smoke. They comprise 90 x 60mm light green aluminium canisters which are activated by unscrewing the end cap and removing thesafety pin. There is then a delay of 2-4 s econds before smoke is emitted for 30-60 seconds. GSTs are designated SHIPCAT 3 and are to be handled and operated in accordance with the instructions in BR 862 Volume 4 - Ship Explos ive Store Safety Instruction and BR 41 - Weapon Data Sheet. 2346. The Whole-ship NBCDQ is to be nominated as the Specialist User Officer for N5 and N6 Smoke Generators, which are to be handed over to him at the Explosive Delivery Point EDP of the magazine hatch. He is th en to ensure that the smoke gene rators are handed to a responsible person, defined as someone who has been briefed by an NBCDQ on the purpose of use of the generators for a given exercise and in specified compartments, the mode of safe operation and the maximum numbers to be used. FOST S eariders and Squadron St aff may be considered responsible persons for the ope ration of smoke generators ba sed on their experience and in house training. 2347. Table Top planning of exercises should include stipulation of the maximum number of smoke generators to be used in compartments and nominate th e responsible person to activate them. It should be stressed that within the cons traints of training rea lism, consideration should be given to minimum use within living compartments such as messdecks and cabins. 2348. The following precautions are to be taken when using GSTs a. Operators must wear heavy duty ie leather gloves.b. On initiation, the canister must be held at arms length and directed away from the face and other personnel. It should then be placed immediately on a flat surface, preferably in an open caniste r eg metal waste bin. The built in 2-4 second delay allows this to be done. c. An SPEAFFF extinguisher or independent water supply is to be available. Should the GST flare or should its canister bulge after initiation, it is to be extinguished immediately.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-25 Change 3d. They are designed not to emit flames or hot particles and s hould not damage deck covering. However, once initiated the canis ter should be placed on a level surface and prevented from sliding against combustible materials. It can be extinguished byimmersion in water. e. The N6 generator must not be used in closed compartments smaller than 90m 3. The N5 which contains half the charge of the N 6, is not to be used in compartments of less than 50m3. At concentrations given by this cons traint the smoke is safe to be breathed for up to 5 minutes, for longer periods BA should be worn. f. These stores are not to be used in an y compartment containi ng flammable liquids. g. These smoke generators can release a h eavy deposit of white powder that may affect the operation of electronic equipment and filte rs. Care should be taken to avoid use in unsuitable compartments whenever possible. h. Severe respiratory distress may be cau sed by N5N6 smoke generators to some personnel with a history of asthma. Those so affected should be given prompt medical attention and isolated from future exercises involving this smoke. The circumstancesof these incidents are to be reporte d to NMOH Fleet, DMEDOPS Portsmouth. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 23-26 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24-1 Change 2CHAPTER 24 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIREFIGHTING IN UPKEEP PERIODS CONTENTS Para D e f i n i t i o n o f S h i p s i n U p k e e p .......................................... 2401 T y p e s o f U p k e e p .................................................... 2402 P r o b l e m s P e c u l i a r t o S h i p s i n U p k e e p.................................... 2403 A r e a F i r e P r e v e n t i o n O f f i c e r - D e f e n c e F i r e S e r v i c e N a v y ................... 2404 BR 8647 - Navy Departme nt Regulations for Fi re Safety Management .......... 2406 L i a i s o n w i t h t h e L A F B................................................ 2407 F i r e P r e v e n t i o n i n S h i p s i n U p k e e p ...................................... 2408 Fire Rounds ........................................................ 2409 C o n t r o l C e n t r e ...................................................... 2410 W e l d i n g C o n t r o l..................................................... 2411 W e l d i n g S e n t r i e s .................................................... 2412 F i r e a n d E m e r g e n c y P a r t y O r g a n i s a t i o n .................................. 2413 Proximity of Duty Watch Accommodation ................................ 2414 g47 F i r e f i g h t i n g i n S h i p s i n U p k e e p......................................... 2415 g47 S m o k e ............................................................ 2416 g47 S h i p A l o n g s i d e o r i n D r y D o c k ......................................... 2417 g47 Ventilation ......................................................... 2418 g47 H P S e a W a t e r M a i n .................................................. 2419 g47 H o s e s ............................................................. 2420 g47 E s c a p e R o u t e s ...................................................... 2421 g47 B r o w s ............................................................. 2422 g47 ANNEXES Annex A DDFF Upkeep Period Duty Watch Annex B MMPP Fire, Emergency and Security Pa rty During Upkeep at Portsmouth Annex C MMPP Fire, Emergency and Security Party During Upkeep at RosythBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24-3 Change 3CHAPTER 24 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIREFIGHTING IN UPKEEP PERIODS 2401. Definition of Ships in Upkeep Apart from the build phase and disposal, a ships life cycles between two main types of period a.Fleet Time. When CINCFLEET has Scheduling Au thority SA for normal tasking g47 of the vessel. b.Upkeep Time. When SA passes to the Warship Support Agency WSA for a g47 programmed Upkeep Period. 2402. Types of Upkeep There are two main types of Upkeep Peri od, Repair Period RP and Docking Period g47 DP. RPs are reduced-manned, a nd Care and Protection is transf erred to the Upkeep Contractor g47 between Upkeep Period Start Date UPSD and Ships Staff Move Onboard SSMOB. DPs are g47 generally fully-manned, with Care and Protection of the ship inc luding firefighting remaining g47 with the Commanding Officer throughout. Howeve r, there are certain occasions when it may g47 become necessary for the majority of a ships company in a DP to be withdrawn from the vessel, g47 in which case Care and Protection will transfer to the Upkeep Contractor, as in a RP. The g47 particular responsibilities for the Contractor and Ships Staff ar e laid down in the associated g47 Volume 0 of the Work Specification and the Safety Plan. g47 2403. Problems Peculiar to Ships in Upkeep Ships are faced with a number of different problems associated with fire prevention and firefighting when undergoing an Upkeep Period. The introduction of tasks involving the use of open flames, eg burning, cutting, welding and gri nding, together with the amount of arisings, combustible materials and flammable liquids necessary as part of the work increase thelikelihood of fire. The risks associated with d ealing with a fire incide nt are similarly increased due to the changes in the state of a ships syst ems eg with pipework a nd valves removed and structure eg with holes cut in tanks and s uperstructure, and doors removed. A further consideration is the presence of a large number of dockyard workers and outside contractors who may be unfamiliar with the shi p. For the above reasons, regulati ons require that in the event of a fire, no matter how small, the Local Authority Fire Brigade LAFB must be called. Anumber of criteria must be borne in mind in support of LAFB operation. Section 4 of Chapter 20, provides guidance in this area. 2404. Area Fire Prevention Officer - Defence Fire Service Navy All Royal Dockyards and Naval Bases in the UK have an Area Fire Prevention Officer AFPO appointed who is responsible for providi ng advice to both his own establishment and Ships Staff and provides the main link between the ship and the local fire authorities. ShipsStaff are to ensure that the AFPO, and thus the LAFB, are aware of the circumstances,particularly responsibility for firefighting, prevalen t in a ship at different stages of the Upkeep Period. 2405. Although AFPOs are located in their particular Base Ports, they also have responsibility for providing cover to ships that may be refitting in commercial yards, carrying out inspectionsappropriate to the U pkeep venue and type.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24-4 UK RESTRICTED2406. BR 8647 - Navy Department Regulations for Fire Safety Management BR 8647 is sponsored by the Command Fire O fficer Royal Navy on the staff of the Chief Environment and Safety Officer Navy, and deals with fire prevention in all MODN establishments and bases. However, there is some overlap between BR 2170 and BR 8647 for HM Ships undergoing Upkeep and, if required, advice should be sought from AFPO on arrival at the Upkeep venue. 2407. Liaison with the LAFB It is important that liaison with the LAFB is established through the AFPO at the start of an Upkeep Period and a good relationship fost ered through visits and involvement in fire exercises as appropriate. The AFPO will organise attendance of the LAFB at exercises and willattend himself to help w ith conduct and debriefing. 2408. Fire Prevention in Ships in Upkeep The risk of fire during an Upkeep Period can be reduced by application of good common sense, adherence to strict rounds routines and good practices coupled with a disciplined approach to fire safety and reduction of fire hazards. In ships where Care and Protec tion of the ship is held by a contractor, Ships Staff are to report any shortcomings in fire prevention measures to theSuperintendent Ships repr esentative and the Upkeep Contractor without delay. 2409. Fire Rounds When Care and Protection responsibility is held by the Commanding Officer regular rounds, not necessarily at fixed times, must be carried out, by responsible officers and ratings, as follows a.During Working Hours. All spaces where work is underway to ensure that fire risks are minimised, that weldingburning is not being undertaken without proper authorisation, that weldingburning sentries are carrying out their duties correctly andthat firefighting equipment is dist ributed correctly and is available. b.At the End of the Working Day. All spaces affected by work to ensure that they have been left in a safe state and that flammable arisings oily waste, paint tins,adhesives, aerosol sprays etc have not been allowed to accumulate. The rounds must be timed to occur at least one hour af ter the cessation of any hot work. c.Outside Working Hours. Throughout the ship in order to detect any outbreak of fire, this activity may be conduc ted by company ship keepers if contracted to them and stated in the Safety Plan. 2410. Control Centre The position of HQ1 is chosen to meet the re quirements of damage control in the Action state and to be the control point to deal with normal peace time incidents when a ship is intact. During an Upkeep Period there may be times whe n, due to the amount and type of work being undertaken, an alternative positi on may be more suitable. If this is the case, reliable communications are to be provided and, if feasible, alarms and wa rnings remoted to this position. A portakabin adjacent to the ship or on the flight deck has proven to be a suitable alternative.For reduced-manned Upkeep Periods the contractor will provide the control position ashoreadjacent to the main brow.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24-5 Change 22411. Welding Control Unless the control of welding operations is c ontracted out, eg in reduced-manned Upkeep Periods when the contractor will base his control functions alongside, the task of hot workcontrol falls to Ships Staff. Upkeep Periods are usually invasive and this task should not be underestimated. Commanding Officer s should ensure they have a robust organisation capable of dealing with a significant hot work load. It is advisable to co-locat e the control of hot work with the control centre as described above. 2412. Welding Sentries The number of welding sentries that are to be provided will be detailed in the Work Specification and Safety Plan. The Welding Sentry control organisation must ensure that a competent sentry is detailed for each weldingburning operation and that the guidelines inBR 200020 are followed. 2413. Fire and Emergency Party Organisation For ships where Care and Protection remains with the Commanding Officer the fire hazard is minimised by the use of the Duty Watc h organisation. The size and composition of the Duty Watch and their responsibilities for fire a nd other emergency incide nts will vary depending on the type of ship and prevailing circumstances. Annex 24A provides guidance for FFDDundergoing fully-manned Upkeep. Annexes 24B a nd 24C describe the organisations that are to be used by MMPP vessels of a ll types for Upkeep Period. For ships where Care and Protection transfers to the Upkeep Contractor, for the pe riod between Upkeep Peri od Start Date and Ships Staff Move Onboard Date, the Cont ractor will provide sufficient fi refighting cover. Outside this period a ship is to provide a full Duty Watch in accordance with Chapter 20. If, due to manning constraints, this is not achieva ble, approval to employ a Reduced Duty Watch organisation is to be obtained via the Fleet Waterfront Staff see FEOs. 2414. Proximity of Duty Watch Accommodation g47 For ships in which the Commanding Offi cer retains responsibility for Care and g47 Protection, the Duty Watch must be accommodated as close to the ship as possible, to allow g47 quick and easy access to the ship in an emergency. Therefore, the Duty Watch accommodation g47 should ideally be situated adjacent to, but no more than 350 metres accessible distance from the g47 ship, ie from the accommodation to the top of the ships brow. g47 2415. Firefighting in Ships in Upkeep g47 When a fire is discovered and the alarm rais ed, all contractors a nd personnel not in the Emergency Party are to evacuate the ship and mu ster in a safe position. An early indication of any missing personnel is required in order to initiate rescue action, in conjunction with the LAFB. 2416. Smoke g47 Smoke, one of the greatest hazards in ship firefighting, is particularly so in a ship undergoing Upkeep as many door shatches and smoke curtains are likely to be unavailable to contain the spread of smoke. Th e Control Centre must be awar e of those doors and hatches that cannot be used and the Incident Board must be marked accordingly. For ships responsible for firefighting it is essential that BA is correctly maintained and charging arrangements providedalternative sources of safe breathing air may have to be considered.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24-6 UK RESTRICTED2417. Ship Alongside or in Dry Dock g47 In some circumstances an approach from the jetty or dockside may provide the best and quickest means to deal with a fire. 2418. Ventilation g47 For the majority of an Upkeep Period ventilation w ill rarely be r unning in its normal state. The ships Emergency Party must be aware of the actual state of the system at all times andin addition to crash stopping ven tilation may have to take measures to minimise air flow to a fire. 2419. HP Sea Water Main g47 It is essential that an adequate number of points from which major firefighting equipment can be operated are maintained th roughout the ship. If, due to th e naturescope of work being undertaken in an Upkeep Period, the ships fitted main is unavailable a te mporary main is to be established. The details of this alternative arrangement is to be described in the ships SafetyPlan. 2420. Hoses g47 Firefighting hoses can quickly deteriorate when exposed to the wear and tear on a dockside. Suitable protection a nd regular monitoring of thei r condition should be undertaken. g47 2421. Escape Routes g47 Escape routes for all positions within the ship must be clearly marked, ensuring that they are unambiguous to a work force that may be unf amiliar with the ships layout. Escape routes must be regularly checked to ensure that work does not obstruct egress from the ship. 2422. Brows g47 Sufficient brows must be pr ovided to ensure that evacuation from the ship is not impeded. As a minimum, brows should be provide d forward and aft on each side whilst in dock, dependant on the size of vessel. To maintain security of the ship there should be one main brow, with the remainder locked but capable of be ing open from the inboard side without a key.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24A-1 Change 1ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 24 DDFF UPKEEP PERIOD DUTY WATCH 1. The Requirement The Ships Staff of a DDFF will normally be accommodated ashore during a Docking Period for Health and Safety reasons. If a ship is docked down in a Naval Base port, de- ammunitioned and de-fuelle d and the Ships Staff live ashore, an Upkeep Duty Watch of an Officer of the Day plus 11 hands will allow a Commanding Officer to discharge his Care and Protection responsibilities within accep table levels of risk. This Duty Watch may be utilised at the discretion of the Commanding Officer. 2. Upkeep Duty Watch The Upkeep Duty Watch UDW is focussed on providing a rapid res ponse to any detected fire, with the aim of dealing with an incident before it escalates. A table describing the dutiesof the 12 members of the UDW is shown at Ta ble 24A-1. It should be noted that welding sentries are not to be drawn from this organi sation and, unless provided under the Upkeep Period contract, other hands will have to be nominated for this task. In order to minimise risk it isessential that a Commanding Officer satisfies himself that an effective hot work sentryorganisation and rigorous rounds regime is established. A minimum rounds requirement is shown at Table 24A-2. 3.The UDW can only provide a strong initial attack on a fire it will require the early transfer of firefighting responsibility to the Local Author ity Fire Brigade LAFB who will carry out the support phase firefighting activity if the fire escalates. For this to be successful the LAFB will need careful briefing on the fire incident and guides will be required. In order to provide suitablydressed guides in a timely fash ion, personnel, once released from task, as shown in Table 24A-1, must return to the Officer of the Days cont rol position to be directed to further duties. 4. Implementation The Upkeep Duty Watch requires Ships Staff to take on significantly different roles from those undertaken in Fleet Time. Before imple menting the Upkeep Duty Watch the Commanding Officer is to satisfy himself that they can effectively respond to sh ip emergencies. Ships Staff should review a variety of fire incidents and prove their orga nisation by conducting a number of exercises. During the exercises and reviews the following points merit detailed consideration a. Positioning of potential sites for LAFB Forward Control Positions.b. Provision of effective communi cations throughout the ship at different stages of the Upkeep Period. c. The impact of the spread of smoke due to lack of doorsha tches or incomplete ventilation systems when establishing smoke boundaries. d. Provision of effective evacuation routin es and accounting procedures for personnel including contractors.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24A-2 UK RESTRICTED5. Material Changes As the Upkeep Period progresses there will be changes to the ships material state which may affect the ability of the UDW to respond to emergencies. In pa rticular, the removal of ladders, soft patches and escapes can affect the access to and escape from incidents.Commanding Officers should ensure that a pro cedure for monitoring changes to the ships material state is established and that all members of the UDW are briefed on the condition of theship at the start of their duty period. Table 24A-1. 12-Man UDW - Fire Incident Tasking Duty Role RankRate Attack PhaseSupport Phase with LAFB in Attendance OOD LtCPO IC of Incident. Liaison with LAFB IC.DPO PO Run field telephone to FCP. Report back to OOD withsitrep. Control Keys.IC Containment. Supervise personnel from other ships. Duty Tech SRCPOPO Provide HPSW from g47 emergency dockside firepump, Tech advice to OOD,check dockside BA chargingfacility if provided.Liaise with Dockyard Control Engineer concerning powersupplies and dockside firemain. IC Guides and act as dresser. IC Attack TeamPOLH FCP IC Attack Party. g47 FCP to liaise with LAFB Fire Officer. SCC WatchkeeperLH Raise Alarm - make pipe, crash stop vent, TIC andcomms to FCPSOTI. IC of g47 initial attack until arrival of g47 nominated IC Attack.Spare Hand Assist OOD - Containment as required. SCC RoundsmanAB Collect 2 x CO 2 extinguishers. g47 Initial Attack No 1.Fearnought Suitman - LAFB Guide No 1. Off-watch SCCWatchkeeperLH Attack BA No 1. Fearnought Suitman - LAFB Guide No 4 if required,otherwise containment. Off-watch SCCRoundsmanAB Attack BA No 2. Fearnought Suitman - LAFB Guide No 3 if required,otherwise containment. QM LH Raise Alarm to Dockyard LAFB. Mark up IncidentBoard, assist OOD, monitorKill Cards.OOD Support-Incident Board Marker. BM AB Collect 2 x SPEAFFF. g47 Initial Attack No 2.Fearnought Suitman - LAFB Guide No 2. Off-watch QMLH Attack BA Controller BA Controller Off-watch BMAB Place Gangway Flag, take T Card Racks to musterpoint.Dresser. Recharge used BA bottles FCP Forward Control Position SOTI Scene of the Incident g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24A-3 Change 1Table 24A-2. 12-Man UDW - Minimum Fire prevention Rounds Requirement Duty Rounds Areas Rounds Conducted OOD Whole ship except machinery spaces, store rooms andmagazines concentrating onfire hazards.Within one hour of completion of normal working day. Once every 4hours between end of work and2359. Once between 2359 and startof working day combined with DPOrounds. Duty Tech SR MEWE area concentrating on areas where work has recentlytaken place.Within one hour of completion of normal working day. Once per 4hour watch until 2359. Oncebetween 2359 and 0600. DPO Store rooms and magazines concentrating on firehazards.With one hour of completion of normal working day. Once every 4hours between end of work and2359. Once between 2359 and startof working day combined withOOD rounds. SCC Roundsman Whole ship. Hourly 24 hours a day.IC Attack FF equipment dumps. On assuming duty. Every 4 hours until 2359. One hour before handing g47 over duty.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24A-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24B-1 OriginalANNEX B TO CHAPTER 24 MMPP FIRE, EMERGENCY AND SECURITY PARTY DURING UPKEEP AT PORTSMOUTH 1. The Requirement Commanding Officers of MMPPs are responsible fo r the safety and security of their vessels throughout an Upkeep period. This annex describe s the role of the Fire, Emergency and Security Party FESP of MMPPs undergoing U pkeep by contract at Portsmouth. 2.For the periods in an Upkeep Period that the sh ip is docked or afloat in a non-tidal basin 2 Basin included until one week before Ships Staff move onboard SSMOB, a Fire, Emergency and Security Party FESP is to be formed. Howe ver, if fuel is embarked during this period the FESP is to be augmented by a Senior Technical Rating STR. 3. Role of the FESP The role of the FESP is to a. Conduct security rounds and provide a fireflood prevention organisation. b. Raise the alarm in the event of discovering a fireflood.c. Provide a first aid firefigh tingflood containment capability. d. Provide a Ships Staff Command and Control organisation to liaise with the LAFB and provide expertise and guides to assist LAFB firefighters. 4.Provision of weldinghot work sentries, if required, is to be ma de from non-FESP members. 5. Organisation The manning requirement for the FESP will depend on where the ship is berthed and the Commanding Officers ability to safely maintain an attack on a fire. As the composition and tasks of the FESP will alter throughout an Upkeep Period, each change is to be tested by carrying out a comprehensive programme of training and exercises. The minimum requirements are a. When docked in a graving dock. 1 IC FESP - Ships Duty Officer SDO OfficerSenior Rating.2 FESP - 4 Junior Ratings. b. At a non-tidal berth before emba rkation of fuel for set-to-work 1 IC FESP - SDO as described above.2 FESP - 4 Junior Ratings, one of which is to be a technical rating conversant with powersystem isolations.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24B-2 UK RESTRICTEDc. At a non-tidal berth after embark ation of fuel for set-to-work 1 IC FESP - SDO as described above.2 STR - to be fully conversan t with powersystem isolations. 3 FESP - 4 Junior Ratings. 6.The FESP is to provide the following a. Fire, emergency and security c over for the duration of their duty. b. Outside normal working hours, rounds as follows, to be recorded in a log at the gangway 1 Hourly, by a member of the FESP.2 At the end of the routine working day andor on completion of all work, by SDO and by the STR once inaugurated. 7.Whilst the ship is in Upkeep, the on-watch roundsman and quartermaster are to work from a portacabin adjacent to the gangway. However, if the ships flood and fire warning systems are functional then the quartermaster is to be stationed onboard to monitor the alarm system. 8. Actions to be Taken by th e Person Discovering a Fire The person discovering a fire is to take the following actions a. Raise the alarm and operate the nearest contractor installed fire alarm. The quartermaster will call the LAFB and info rm the Duty Watch in their accommodation. b. Attack the fire using first aid firefighting equipment.c. If forced to withdraw after the initial attack, report to the SDO at the gangway. 9. Actions to be Taken by the FESP a. SDO is to 1 On receipt of the fire alarm, alert the FESP and proceed to the ships gangway and assume command of the incident. 2 Obtain a brief from the person discoveri ng the fire, and mark up the incident board. 3 Brief the LAFB, on their arrival, with respect to fire location and known hazards. If appropriate, hand over res ponsibility for firefighting to the LAFB but retain overall responsibility for the safety of the vessel.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24B-3 Change 14 Dress the off-watch FESP ratings in full firefighting rig to act as guides for the LAFB. b. FESP 1 On-watch FESP to fight the fire if possible. Proceed to the gangway and brief the SDO. 2 Two off-watch FESP are to proceed to the gangway position, don BA and investigateattack the fire. 3 On completion of Attack BA duties, if able, dress in full firefighting rig in preparation for acting as LAFB guides. 4 If fuel is embarked the STR is to proceed to the ship and make necessary system isolations. On completion he is to brie f the SDO on actions taken, hazards and system configurations. 10. Equipment A secure Ships Staff fire locker with frangible key container is to be sited adjacent to the gangway. It is to contain the following equi pment provided and be ma intained by the Ships Staff 6 SPEAFFF 2 CO2 extinguishers 4 Fearnought suits, boots etc. 2 BA 4 spare bottles with BA control boards and marker pens. 2 FFHBC and 1 hand-held radio 1 TIC with spare batteries Guidelinesound powered SP telephone wire 2 SP telephones Incident board and marker pens Kill Cards Torches 1 Submersible pump 1 Portable eductor Soft wood wedges 11.Ships Staff are to provide radio communi cation between the SDO and roundsman and SDO and firefighters.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24B-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24C-1 Change 1ANNEX C TO CHAPTER 24 MMPP FIRE, EMERGENCY AND SECURITY PARTY DURING UPKEEP AT ROSYTH 1. The Requirement The Synchrolift Building at Rosyth is designated as a factory for firefighting purposes. This requires the building to be evacuated immediately in the event of a fire alarm and no persons areable to re-enter the building until given clearance by the LAFB. 2.Unless modified by the provisions of a ship s Upkeep contract, Commanding Officers of MMPPs remain responsible for the safety and s ecurity of their vessels throughout an Upkeep Period. This annex defines the role of the Fire, Emergency and Security Party FESP of MMPPs undergoing Upkeep in Rosyth, where Commanding Officers retain responsibility for Care and Protection. For the periods in an Upk eep Period that the ship is docked graving dock or synchrolift or afloat in a non-tidal basi n until one week before Ships Sta ff move onboard SSMOB, a Fire, Emergency and Security Party FESP is to be formed. However, if fuel isembarked during this period the FESP is to be augmented by a Senior Technical Rating STR. 3. Role of the FESP The role of the FESP is to a. Conduct security rounds and provide a fireflood prevention organisation. b. Raise the alarm in the event of discovering a fireflood.c. Provide a first aid firefigh tingflood containment capability. d. Provide a Ships Staff Command and Control organisation to liaise with the LAFB and provide expertise and guides to assist LAFB firefighters. 4.Provision of weldinghot work sentries, if required, is to be ma de from non-FESP members. 5. Organisation The manning requirement for the FESP will depend on where the ship is berthed and the Commanding Officers ability to safely maintain an attack on a fire. As the composition andtasks of the FESP will alter throughout an Upkeep Period, each change is to be tested by carrying out a comprehensive programme of training and exercises. The minimum requirements are a. When docked in a graving dock. 1 IC FESP - Ships Duty Officer SDO OfficerSenior Rating.2 FESP - 4 Junior Ratings see note. b. When docked in the Synchrolift building 1 IC FESP - SDO as described above.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24C-2 UK RESTRICTED2 FESP - 2 Junior Ratings. c. At a non tidal berth before emba rkation of fuel for set-to-work 1 IC FESP - SDO as described above.2 FESP - 4 Junior Ratings, one of which is to be a technical rating conversant with powersystem isolations see note. d. At a non tidal berth after embark ation of fuel for set-to-work 1 IC FESP - SDO as described above.2 STR - to be fully conversan t with powersystem isolations. 3 FESP - 4 Junior Ratings see note. Note. If a contractors shipkeeper acting as a Quartermas ter is provided under the Upkeep contract then the number of junior ratings may be reduced by one. 6.The FESP is to provide the following a. Fire, emergency and security c over for the duration of their duty. b. Outside normal working hours, rounds as follows, to be recorded in a log at the gangway 1 Hourly, by a member of the FESP.2 At the end of the routine working day andor on completion of all work, by the g47 SDO and by the STR once inaugurated. 7.Whilst the ship is docked in the Synchrolift th e roundsman is to base himself in the ships refit offices. He is to inform the contractors Synchrolift watc hkeeper of his whereabouts at all times and specifically on the start and comple tion of his rounds. All access tofrom the g47 shipSynchrolift outside normal working hours is to be via the access tofrom the shipSynchrolift g47 watchkeepers controlled access at the north end of the building. 8.Once the ship is afloat at a non-tidal bert h the on-watch roundsman is to work from a portacabin adjacent to the gangway. If a contractors shipkeeper is provided in lieu of aquartermaster, the roundsman is to inform th e shipkeeper of his whereabouts at all times. 9. Actions to be Taken by th e Person Discovering a Fire The person discovering a fire is to take the following actions a. Raise the alarm and operate the nearest contractor-installed fire alarm. The watchkeepers will call the LAFB and inform Lowden Building.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24C-3 Originalb. Attack the fire using first aid firefighting equipment. c. If forced to withdraw after the initial attack, report to the SDO at the nominated control position 1 The gangway if afloat.2 The Emergency Control Cent re Synchrolift if docked. 3 The gangway if docked in a graving dock. 10. Actions to be Taken by the FESP a. Docked in Synchrolift 1 SDO is to a On receipt of the fire alarm, alert the FESP and proceed to the Emergency Control Centre ECC and assu me command of the incident. b Obtain a brief from the person discoveri ng the fire, and mark up the incident board. c Brief the LAFB on their arrival with respect to fire location and known hazards and hand over responsibility for the incident to the LAFB senior officer. d Dress the off-watch FESP ratings in full firefighting rig to act as guides for the LAFB. 2 FESP a On-watch FESP to fight the fire if po ssible. Proceed to the ECC and brief the SDO as appropriate. b Off-watch FESP are to proceed to the ECC and dress in full firefighting rig in preparation for acting as LAFB guide. Note. In the event of a fire alarm being raised in the Synchrolift, due to the design of the alarm system, all ships FESP teams are to a ttend an incident, reporti ng to their respective SDO at the ECC. Once an incident is confirmed within a ship in the Synchrolift, then theSDO of that ship is to take command utilising all FESP teams as required. However, actionis to be limited to the provision of advi ce to the LAFB and supplying guides in support of the LAFB firefighting activity. If the fire is in the Synchrolift building but not affecting aship they are to take no part in the operation but should remain on call to advise the LAFBor provide guides in the event of a fire spreading.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24C-4 UK RESTRICTEDb. In a graving dock or afloat before embarking fuel 1 SDO is to a On receipt of the fire alarm - alert the FESP and proceed to the ships gangway and assume co mmand of the incident. b Obtain a brief from the person discoveri ng the fire, and mark up the incident board. c Brief the LAFB on their arrival with respect to the fire location and known hazards. If appropriate, hand over responsibility for firefighting to the LAFB but retain overall responsibility fo r the safety of the vessel. d Dress off-watch FESP ratings in full fire fighting rig to act as guides for the LAFB. 2 FESP a On-watch FESP to fight the fire is possible. Proceed to gangway and brief the SDO. b Two off-watch FESP proceed to the gang way position, don BA and investigateattack the fire. c On completion of Attack BA duties, if able, dress in full firefighting rig in preparation for acting as LAFB guides. c. Afloat after Embarking Fuel 1 SDO. As in 10b.1 above. 2 STR a On receipt of the fire alarm proceed to the ship and make the necessary system isolations. b On completion of system isolations proceed to ships gangway and brief the SDO on actions taken, hazards and system configurations. 3 FESP. As in 10b2 above. 11. Equipment A secure Ships Staff fire locker with fra ngible key container is to be provided when docked, Synchrolift or graving dock and afloat before SSMOB, to be sited adjacent to the designated incident control position. It is to contain the following equipment provided and maintained by shipUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24C-5 Change 36 SPEAFFF 2 CO2 extinguishers 4 Fearnought suits, boots etc.2 BA 4 spare bottles with BA control boards and marker pens2 FFHBC and 1 hand-held radio1 TIC with spare batteriesGuidelinesound powered SP telephone wire 2 SP telephones Incident board and marker pensKill CardsTorches1 Submersible pump1 Portable eductorSoft wood wedges One week before SSMOB, and in association with Duty Watch training, this equipment is to be properly secured onboard. 12.Ships Staff are to provide radio communi cation between the SDO and roundsman and SDO and firefighters.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 24C-6 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-1 Change 1CHAPTER 25 AIRCRAFT FIREFIGHTING CONTENTS Para A i r c r a f t O p e r a t i o n s .................................................. 2501 T h e B e h a v i o u r o f A i r c r a f t C o n s t r u c t i o n M a t e r i a l s i n F i r e..................... 2502 M a g n e s i u m......................................................... 2503 A l u m i n i u m ......................................................... 2505 Beryllium .......................................................... 2506 C o m p o s i t e F i b r e M a t e r i a l s............................................. 2507 Carbon Fibres ....................................................... 2509 F u e l S y s t e m s ....................................................... 2513 H y d r a u l i c S y s t e m s ................................................... 2514 E l e c t r i c a l S y s t e m s ................................................... 2515 C o m p r e s s e d O x y g e n S y s t e m s .......................................... 2518 L i q u i d O x y g e n S y s t e m s ............................................... 2519 A i r c r a f t S y s t e m s i n F i r e C o n d i t i o n s...................................... 2520 O t h e r C o m b u s t i b l e M a t e r i a l s........................................... 2522 A i r c r a f t E j e c t i o n S e a t s ................................................ 2523 A r m a m e n t a n d P y r o t e c h n i c s ........................................... 2524 T h e E f f e c t s o f H e a t o n R o c k e t M o t o r s ................................... 2525 The Effects of Heat on Cannon Shell ..................................... 2526 B e h a v i o u r o f P y r o t e c h n i c s i n A i r c r a f t F i r e s ............................... 2528 Smoke and Flame Producing Compositions ............................... 2529 R i s k R e d u c t i o n...................................................... 2530 C r a s h R e s c u e S t r a t e g y ................................................ 2533 C r i t i c a l A r e a........................................................ 2535 C r a s h F i r e f i g h t i n g T e a m s - S t a t e o f R e a d i n e s s ............................. 2536 A p p r o a c h a n d P r e p a r a t i o n o f F i r e C r a s h R e s c u e T e a m s ...................... 2537 O p e n i n g t h e A t t a c k .................................................. 2538 Support of the RescueEvacuation ....................................... 2540 M e a n s o f E n t r a n c e i n t o A i r c r a f t......................................... 2544 N o r m a l E n t r a n c e s.................................................... 2545 M a r k i n g o f N o r m a l E n t r a n c e s .......................................... 2546 Emergency Entrances Canopies ....................................... 2547 E m e r g e n c y E n t r a n c e s D o o r s .......................................... 2548 M a r k i n g o f E m e r g e n c y E n t r a n c e s ....................................... 2549 M i n i a t u r e D e t o n a t i o n C o r d M D C ...................................... 2550 O p e r a t i o n o f t h e M D C E x t e r n a l E m e r g e n c y C a b l e .......................... 2551 B r e a k - i n P o i n t s...................................................... 2552 R e s c u e o f A i r c r e w a n d P a s s e n g e r s ...................................... 2553UK RESTRICTED 25-2 UK RESTRICTEDCONTENTS Continued Para L o c a t i n g t h e F i r e .................................................... 2555 E n g i n e F i r e s ........................................................ 2556 P o s t - C r a s h M a n a g e m e n t .............................................. 2557 H a n g a r F i r e s........................................................ 2558 D e t a i l e d S h i p - T y p e I n f o r m a t i o n ........................................ 2559 C r a s h o n D e c k - I m m e d i a t e S h i p A c t i o n s ................................. 2560 H e l i c o p t e r O p e r a t i o n s i n M M P P s - F i r e f i g h t i n g P r e p a r a t i o n s ................. 2561 ANNEX Annex A NBCD Reactions to a Flight Deck EmergencyUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-3 Change 3CHAPTER 25 AIRCRAFT FIREFIGHTING 2501. Aircraft Operations This chapter provides information to Ships Staffs on aircraft firefighting. It supplements the information in BR 766C - Aircraft Operating Handbook. 2502. The Behaviour of Aircraft Construction Materials in Fire The following paragraphs give an introduction to the behaviour of aircraft construction materials in fire. 2503. Magnesium Only magnesium alloys or aluminium alloys with a high magnesium content are likely to burn in an aircraft fire and those must be surrounded by flame for some time, usually a few minutes before they are ignited. When they are ignited they burn with a brilliant glare but thisbrilliance is rather misleading although the meta l itself attains an extremely high temperature, up to 3000C, it gives off comparatively little heat and the mean flame length is no more than 50mm. Magnesium fires are not likely to be extinguished by mass discharge of foam normallyused against aircraft fires. Burning magnesium is capable of breaking down water into itsconstituent elements, hydrogen and oxygen. The magnesium combines with some of the oxygenand the hydrogen may burn. The immediate result is intensification of the fire. 2504. Although the immediate result of applying water to burning magnesium alloy components is to intensify the fire, the quantity of water which magnesium is capable of breaking down is only three-quarters its ow n weight and, as the magnesiu m and the water are in contact only at their surfaces, the proportion of a conti nuous stream of water which is broken down is relatively small. If the stream of water is maintained, most of it is able to cool the magnesiumuntil it solidifies and the fire is extinguished. It is therefore not advisable to use spray for coolingmagnesium because of the low water application rate. It is better to use a jet at low pressure toachieve concentrated swamping and work progressively over the burning surfaces. Therecommended method of app lication is by applying water at a pressure of two to three bar through the foam-making branchpipe over the bur ning magnesium. This method allows the quantity of water to allow swamping of the magnesium and gives the branch operator an onofffacility. 2505. Aluminium Aluminium will ignite when heated to 800C but the major airframe alloys duralumin, alclad, etc are not ignited in aircraft fires. A possible reason for this is that the melting point ofaluminium is approximately 600C, so it fuses and drips to the ground some time before it could be ignited. In doing so, it would often escape into an area where temperatures are significantlylower, and in this molten form it is easily covered and effectively sealed by a mass discharge offoam.UK RESTRICTED 25-4 UK RESTRICTED2506. Beryllium Although occasionally used in aircraft cons truction, beryllium is more widely used in electrical or electronic equipment installed in aircraft. Berylliumberyllia in solid form does notpose a hazard, but as a dust, powder or as an oxide it gives rise to serious health risk and extreme cases may lead to death. Various precautions may need to be taken, such as full protective clothing aircraft crash and BA should be wo rn. Breathing of dust or smoke from a component or equipment known to contain beryllium is to be avoided. When beryllium or its alloys are involved in an intense fire, there is an acute and immediate hazard. However, there is no need to adopt any special firefightin g techniques or procedures becau se of the presence of beryllium. 2507. Composite Fibre Materials Organic Compounds in the form of resins and epoxies are used in the manufacture of composite material products. U ndisturbed in the final product, these substances are inert and harmless. When these substances are exposed to elevated temperatures and fires, as may occur in aircraft crashes, these co mpounds become unstable and decom pose. They release smoke and fumes which are toxic. Personnel working in the immediate area following an aircraft crash fire g47 at sea should either don self-c ontained breathing apparatus or a full face negative pressure g47 respirator fitted with the appr opriate filter. Th e S10 respirators may be used by pers onnel g47 involved in Post Crash management PCM in th e general vicinity of, but not actively involved g47 in aircraft crash fire fighting outside of an established cordon. g47 2508. In open, well ventilated spaces, the hazard ar ea of composite materi als smoke and fumes is generally limited to the visible smoke plume. Smoke and fumes dispersed in the open, throughnatural ventilation and dispersal do not constitute a hazard. In areas that are not well ventilated,composite materials smoke and fumes present a h ealth hazard. The presence of smoke and fumes in such areas is usually easily detected by smell. Personnel should immediately evacuate such areas if they are not protected. 2509. Carbon Fibres Pure carbon fibre is chemically inactive and non-toxic. However, carbon fibres have the capacity to absorb other substances. Carbon fi bre released from burning composite material is not pure but carries with it absorbed combusti on products. These products are toxic and thus pose a hazard. 2510. Carbon fibres are electronically conductive. B ecause they are also very light, they are airborne and can easily be carried to electrical installations or introduced into electronicequipment through cooling air drawn in by equi pment. Sufficient concentration of free carbon fibres will interfere with the operation of electrical and electronic equipment. 2511. The following factors must be considered wh en responding to an incident involving an aircraft containing composite materials a. The upwind approach to th e aircraft must be used. b. Personnel must not enter the visible plume without BA and eye protection. c. BA is to be worn by personnel who ar e imminently or actually exposed directly to the smoke, fumes and gases from burning composite materials. d. Only in the gravest of situations ma y personnel enter the visible smoke plume without full skin protection.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-5 Change 1e. Personnel exposed to the smoke, fumes or gases of composite materials and who are not wearing full skin protection should be withdrawn as soon as possible and be directed to thoroughly shower to remove an y composite materials debris from the skin. f. Flight deck vehicles, etc are to be kept clear of the area unde rneath the smoke plume as carbon fibres which have been released become airborne and drop from the smoke plume downwind. In windstill conditions they are dropped in the immediate vicinity of the fire site. 2512. The post-fire operations, salvage and recovery tasks are to be carefully controlled and monitored, and access to the aircraft crash site is to be restricted to those personnel who are suitably protected by full skin and respirator y clothing see BR 766C1 for more detailed instructions for dealing with fires involving man-made mineral fibres. 2513. Fuel Systems Fuel is carried in a number of tanks, struct urally separated but interconnected, in the wings, and in many instances, in the fuse lage. The principle types of tanks are a.Fuel Systems. These are compartments formed by the airframe structure itself, which are sprayed internally with a synthetic rubber composition to seal their joints and make them fuel-tight. b.Bag-Type Tanks. These are flexible plastic bags fitted into compartments in the wings or fuselage and secured by a pattern of press studs. They are sometimes known as collapsible tanks. c.Auxiliary Tanks. These are carried externally under the wings or fuselage. They are aerodynamically-shaped a nd constructed from moulded fibreglass or a metal frame covered with stressed skin, de pending on their size. In most instances, these tanks can be jettisoned in an emergency. 2514. Hydraulic Systems Hydraulic fluid is carried in one or more rese rvoirs, usually installed in the fuselage. A reservoir may be a metal tank, which is not pressuri sed, or it may be a flex ible bladder contained in a tank which is pressurised by air ducted from an engine compressor. The hydraulic fluid from the reservoirs is circulated through the sy stem by one or more high pressure pumps. Accumulators are installed in the HP side of essential circuits. 2515. Electrical Systems In most aircraft the electrical services are supplied by engine-driven alternators or generators providing ac and dc power. Additiona lly, the engine-drive generators charge the aircraft batteries which provide a small reserve of power. Both lead- acid and alkaline batteries are used. 2516. The method of disconnecting the supply from th e aircrafts batteri es are as follows a.GroundFlight Switch. On a few types of aircraft there is a master electrical switch often called the groundflight sw itch and the batteries are comp letely isolated when this is in the ground position.UK RESTRICTED 25-6 UK RESTRICTEDb.Battery Isolation Switch. Most types of aircraft have a battery isolating switch whether or not they have a groundflight switc h. This switch isolates the batteries from nearly all the electrical circuits but some emergency services eg fire extinguishingsystems, engine re-light circuits remain connected. 2517. It should be noted that aircraft usually re ceive their electrical power from an external supply while they are on the ground, and that it is pointless to use the battery isolation switch while the aircraft remains conn ected to an external supply. 2518. Compressed Oxygen Systems The system is supplied from a number of cy linders containing gaseous oxygen GOX at 1800 psi. 2519. Liquid Oxygen Systems Liquid oxygen LOX systems are supplied fro m one or more LOX converters. These are spherical or cylindrical in shape, insulated and contain evaporating coils and valves toregulate the rate of evaporation of the liquid according to demand. 2520. Aircraft Systems in Fire Conditions Many of the aircraft powered and pressurise d systems depend to a very large extent on the running of the aircrafts en gines to provide their original power or pressure and it follows that many of them will become inoperative or lose their pressure in crash conditions. 2521. An aircrafts systems are likely to have more influence in the development of a fire when fire occurs in an aircraft on deck a. The systems are intact and there would have been no loss of pressure other than that from shutting off the engines. b. An outbreak of fire in an aircraft deck may be localised at first, but the system may be influential because 1 Light alloy distribution piping may fuse at hot spots at an early stage, possibly releasing flammable substances. 2 The distribution systems may be the means of spreading fire through the interior of the airframe. 3 Electrical circuits are more likely to be live.4 The distribution of the system may create misleading impressions of the extent of a fire, or the location of the seat of the fire, by conveying smoke to apertures some distance away.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-7 Change 12522. Other Combustible Materials Many system components include mate rials which, although free-burning, may smoulder, often giving off disp roportionally large quan tities of smoke. Most of these are various forms of plastics used as linings or insulati on and are often in well concealed positions. They may be resistant to extinction by foam or CO2 and they may continue to glow for some time until they cool naturally or until they are cooled by the application of water. 2523. Aircraft Ejection Seats Ejection seats are used in all jet fighters. Because of the potential dangers from ejection seats and their associated expl osive canopies, red triangular wa rning signs are displayed on the fuselage adjacent to the ejection seats on either side of the aircraft. If advertently fired duringa rescue or drill, the ejection seat can become lethal to both the pilot and the rescuer. In orderthat the safety of aircrew and rescuers is ensure d, the firecrash rescue teams must have a basic knowledge of how an ejection seat works and the whereabouts of certain units on the seat. WARNING DO NOT TOUCH AN EJECTION SEAT UNLESS IT IS FOR RESCUE OR DRILL PURPOSES 2524. Armament and Pyrotechnics Detailed information will be found in BR 862 - Naval Magazine and Explosive Regulations, Volume 1. The following introductory information is for guidance only. There are four broad categories of armament and pyrotechni c stores in aircraft a.Minor Pyrotechnic Stores. This category covers the many uses of cartridges as an intrinsic part of the aircrafts system and survival equipment. The number anddistribution of these varies with the type of aircraft. b.Major Pyrotechnic Stores. These form part of the load carried by an aircraft, usually on carriers or in contai ners inside the aircraft or on external pylons. The stores which may be carried vary according to the role of the aircraft and the mission which isbeing flown. c.Weapons. These may form part of the load carried by an aircraft in a bomb bay, on external pylons or recessed within the airfra me. The weapons which may be carried vary according to the role of the aircraft and the mission which is being flown. d.Freight. Considerable quantities of weapons a nd explosives may be carried in the cargo holds of aircraft and ma y consist of any or all of the armament and pyrotechnics mentioned above.UK RESTRICTED 25-8 UK RESTRICTED2525. The Effects of Heat on Rocket Motors A rocket motor is a steel tube containing a shaped charge of cordite or other solid propellant designed for controlle d burning to produce a flow of gases through a venturi exhaust for a number of seconds. The propellant charge is manufactured to a cross-sectional shape which allows circulation of air and escape of gases during burning eg a cruc iform cross-section is common. If this assembly is affected by external heat and the charge subsequently ignites, it isnot likely to burn in the same controlled way. Taking cordite as an example, it deteriorates attemperatures above 50C, and the charge would lo se its shape, perhaps blocking the passages to the exhaust. Moreover, the higher the temperature, the faster the rate at which cordite burns, butthe venturi exhaust is designed to pass the ga s flow which cool cordite would produce. It is probable therefore that extreme pressure woul d develop within the motor tube, which itself would be weakened by heating, and that the mo tor tube would burst perhaps blowing out the venturi assembly. Ignition of a rocket motor thus may result in a low order of detonation, like a warhead, rather than propulsion of the missile. 2526. The Effects of Heat on Cannon Shell As cannon ammunition consists of two component s, the cartridge and the shell, there are several possible effects of exposure to heat a nd the results would depe nd on which occurred first a. HE shells may burst, like any other warhead, before the cartridge is affected.b. The cartridge case may expand more than the shell so that there is no longer a gas- tight fit. c. The cartridge charge may burst the weakened cartridge case. 2527. Such effects as these would mean that th e shells would not be projected and the following points should be borne in mind a. The shells are not in a gun breech and therefore would be projected at random in low velocity, tumbling, end-over-end flight. b. If there is ammunition in the breech of a gun it would be well insulated from heat. Distortion of the gun mounting, barrel or othe r components is likely to occur before the ammunition in the gun would be effected. 2528. Behaviour of Pyrotechnics in Aircraft Fires The points about w eapons are also applicable to pyrotechnic stores. Generally, pyrotechnics stores have comparatively thin casing. If there is a burster charge to release thepyrotechnic filling, it may be initiated by heat, but it would probably be insulated at first by thefilling which itself may create other hazards.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-9 Change 32529. Smoke and Flame Producing Compositions The filling of these pyrotechnics may be ignited at an early stage during an aircraft crash fire and it is virtually impossible to extinguis h these compositions when they are burning. A covering of foam would inte rfere with the liberation of gas and would subdue flaming. Whenever possible, it is better to allow the whole of the filling to burn away. The fumes fromthese compositions are in the form of clearly visible coloured smoke and the flames burn withhigh brilliance so it is possible to avoid them. Full protective clothing, with helmet visor down,is adequate protection against this hazard. 2530. Risk Reduction It follows from the previous paragraphs that, if the firecrash rescue teams can attack and suppress the fire rapidly, seri ous damage may be adverted. This is, of course, the normal objective and it is important therefore that the pr esence of weapons or pyro technics stores should not provoke what may be less effec tive firefighting by causing diffu sion of the firefighting effort. 2531. It is an over-simplification to expect weapons or stores exposed to fire to behave as when they are fired or detonated in the ordinary way. It follows that precautions which are based on an expectation of ordinary beha viour ie keeping out of the pr esumed line of fire of cannon, RP or guided weapons are either inadequate or unnecessary. Such inhibited positioning ie firefighting equipment and personne l outside the whole area in front of an aircraft, from one out- board pylon to the other might prevent really effective firefighting especially where there is onlya limited discharge of foam. 2532. The opening attack on an airc raft should not be varied b ecause weapons or pyrotechnics are present rapid suppression of major flame masses remains the starting point. In many instances, it may be necessary to achieve this before the weapons or stores can be located and it is probable that they would be in positions wh ich are well shielded fro m jets. A weapon bay or ventral pack has the virtually complete shielding of the aircrafts centre section and it is likelythat external weapons which have not been sepa rated would be at least partly covered by the mainplane. In these circumstan ces, monitors should be used for no longer than is necessary to ensure that branchmen can close in to work their jets directly into such shielded zones. 2533. Crash Rescue Strategy The firecrash rescue teams, with regard to aircraft crash rescue firefighting, have the following primary responsibilities a. To save life.b. To minimise damage to aircraft and its associated equipment.c. To make safe any special risks. 2534. Passengers and aircrew cannot be expected to survive beyond three minutes if subject to fire. The equipment, organisation and training of the crash rescue and fire teams is, therefore, to be such that the fire can be extinguished or brought under control within three minutes from the start of firefighting operatio ns and be kept suppressed for sufficient time to ensure the completion of rescue operations and final ex tinction of the fire.UK RESTRICTED 25-10 UK RESTRICTED2535. Critical Area The critical area of an ai rcraft involved in a crash fire is deemed to be the area within the airframe which contains the crew and passengers. The critical area is the area that must be protected from fire in order to create the survivable conditions to allow personnel to live. The position and extent of the critical area depends on the type of aircraft involved, ie for fighter aircraft Harrier the critical area is the area around the cockpit. However, when passenger- carrying helicopters are involved, the critical area consists of the whole fuselage. 2536. Crash Firefighting Teams - State of Readiness The standby requirements of the firec rash rescue teams are as follows a.Normal Standby Multi-Spot Decks Only. At all times the watch is on duty and the whole team is to be dressed in Crash Fire Fighting Assembly CFFA, except helmetand gloves which should be kept in cl ose proximity of firefighting equipment. b.Priority Landing. When an aircraft is returning to the ship with a problem, the duty team is to be fully dressed in CFFA a nd closed up at a pre-determined point on the flight deck with appropria te firefighting equipment. c.Emergency Landing. When an aircraft has to make a forced landing as soon as possible, the duty team is to close up at a pre-determined point on the flight deck and approach the incident, as directed by th e pilot or marshall, with the appropriate firefighting equipment. d.Crash on Deck with Fire. The firecrash rescue t eams suppress the fire in the critical area using the appropriate m obile extinguishers SF90 or 10kg CO 2. The flight deck party operate fire hydran ts in accordance with the flight deck watchbill. When the critical area is secured from fire, the firerescue teams will carry out a rescue. Hangarcurtain to be lowered to 2 metres from the deck, aircraft lifts to be brought to flight deck g47 level and lift drivers remain closed up for the duration of the incident to facilitatecasualty evacuation. e.Crash on Deck without Fire. This type of incident should in its initial phase be attacked in the same manner as a crash on deck with fire. There will be a very high riskthat fuel will issue from ruptured tanks. All spilt fuel, especially in the critical area,must be covered with foam before an entry is made. Normal crash rescue procedures can then be carried out. 2537. Approach and Prep aration of FireCr ash Rescue Teams When approaching the scene of an incident, the person in charge of firecrash rescue teams will note several factors to help in deciding where to deploy teams a. Accessibility to the aircraft crash.b. Wind speed and direction.c. The state of the surrounding deck.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-11 Change 3d. Dangers associated with aircraft. e. The position of the aircraft and its condition. 2538. Opening the Attack The first phase of a foam attack at an aircraft crash is governed by two general principles a. The maximum discharge rate should be applied, ie applicator FB1010 fully opened and operating at its optimum output. b. Foam application should be started from the fuselage and working outwards. If there is a fire in or under the belly of the airc raft near the critical area, this must be the starting point, and 1 If the cockpit is occupied, foam should be spread outwards to increase the separation between cockpit and flame. 2 If it is a passenger-carrying aircraft, again foam must be directed to achieve an increasing separation between fuselage and flame. 2539. Although there may be value in covering the fu selage skin with foam to insulate it from external fire, it is noted that separating the flame from the fuselage, by applying foam to the baseof the flame alongside the fuselage, also reduces the radiant heat and is likely to be moreeffective. Branch operators mu st consider the following points a. Application of foam to the fuselage skin as an insulator has limited value when 1 Exits have been opened or the skin has been ruptured.2 There is any internal fire. b. Application of foam to establish a flame-free strip alongside the fuselage also reduces the total volume of flame. c. It is difficult to control the results when applying a jet to a curved surface of the fuselage. 2540. Support of the RescueEvacuation The initial foam attack should be mass di scharge, aimed to establish survivable conditions for the occupants of the aircraft by reduc ing the effects of heat in the vicinity of the cockpit or passenger cabin. Securing survivable conditions around the cockpit or passenger cabinwill also establish good working conditions for th e rescue team and an exit route for survivors. 2541. When conditions for survival within the aircraft have been established, the branch operator task is to improve conditions outside, for movement of resc uers andor survivors, usually by applying foam to extend the safe area progressively further from where movement is taking place.UK RESTRICTED 25-12 UK RESTRICTED2542. It may be that the entry used by the rescue team is not suitable for the evacuation of casualties. When branch operators are extending the blanketed area, therefore, an importantobjective is to make other possible exits usable. This, applies particularly to passenger-carrying aircraft since rapid evacuation of large numbers is possible only if mo st of the exists can be used. It follows that branch operators must observe th e movements of rescuers and survivors. Where possible, they should try to work in positions between other personnel a nd adjacent flame areas. They should try to avoid being in positions where their jets are directed towards personnel, and if such a position is unavoidable, they must take care to avoid any driving of flames. 2543. The purpose of applying foam is to reduce the area of the fire progressively, starting where the flame appears to present the most direct threat to personnel. This is only a startingpoint and the speed with which the effects of the fire are diminished depends on the rate at whichfoam is spread over the base area of the fire. 2544. Means of Entrance into Aircraft Once the deployment of the firecrash rescue teams is completed and any fire around the critical area has been suppressed, an approach to the cockpit can be made. It is the firecrash rescue teams responsibility to fa miliarise themselves with exit and entrances of aircraft operating on their flight decks. Full and current inform ation on all NATO aircraft is available in NATO g47 STANAG 3896 CFR EDITION 4 AIRCRAFT EMERGENCY RESCUE INFORMATION g47 FIRE PROTECTION which can be found on g47 g47 httpwww.robins.af.miltitilta documentsto00-105E-9.htm g47 g47 Due to the number of multiple amendments being forwarded this publication is not available in g47 hard copy or CD format. There are basica lly four methods of entering an aircraft g47 a.Normal Manual Canopy or Entran ce Operation. This may not always operate due to airframe distortion or, if it operates, the canopy or entrance could hinder rescue work. b.Normal Electrical Canopy or Entrance Operation. This may not operate if the electrical supply has failed or the airframe is distorted. Again, the canopy or entrance could hinder rescue work. c.Emergency Canopy or Entrance Removal. This is the quickest and recommended method to gain access. There ma y be possible hazard from an explosive canopy or Miniature Detonating Cord MDC. d.Break-In Points. If all else fails, either cut away the canopy or break-in point. This is a long and difficult method. 2545. Normal Entrances The normal entrance to an aircraft is either a cockpit canopy or a door. a.Cockpit Canopy. This is fitted to Harrier aircraft and may be operated manually or electrically. Aircraft fitted with ca nopies have no alternative means of entry however, the canopy itself has separa te provision for emergency opening. b.Doors. These are fitted to all other aircraft and are manually operated. Aircraft fitted with doors normally have alternative emergency entrances.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-13 Change 12546. Marking of No rmal Entrances Instructions on how to open normal entrances are usually marked by a. Orange-yellow lettering near the handl e, with direction arrow if necessary. b. Instructions engraved on the handle. 2547. Emergency Entr ances Canopies The canopies of aircraft are designed to be emergency entrances as well as normal entrances and may be jettisoned or shattered in an emergency situation. When the MDC explodes, it shatters the perspex canopy to expos e the occupants. A fragment hazard exists when the canopy shatters. 2548. Emergency Entrances Doors Aircraft with a door or doors may have one or more of th e following means of access for use in an emergency. a.Emergency Doors. Ordinary doors, provided in addition to those normally used. b.Emergency Hatches. Selected windows or panels which can be removed for emergency access.UK RESTRICTED 25-14 UK RESTRICTED Fig 25-1. Marking of Emergency EntrancesUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-15 Change 1 2549. Marking of Em ergency Entrances Operating mechanisms and handles which are for use in an emergency are distinctly marked as follows a. Normally yellow and black diagonal stripe s with operating instructions in orange- yellow lettering and arrows. b. May be red or red in yellow a nd black diagonally striped frame. c. Additionally, a large yellow arrow with the word RESCUE in black letters, points to such handles. 2550. Miniature Detona tion Cord MDC The MDC is an explosive cord fitted to the ca nopies of aircraft H arriers to facilitate the escape of aircrew in an emergency, either in the air or on the ground. It is secured to the inside of the canopy and is designed to sha tter the transparency outwards and away from the occupants. Fig 25-2. MDC SystemUK RESTRICTED 25-16 UK RESTRICTEDDetonation of the MDC is by the normal ejecti on seat sequence, the internal canopy operating lever or the external emergency cable-operated device. When the MDC is detonated an initialcloud of fine particles a nd slivers of the canopy transparency, in line with the cord, are blasted outwards with the remainder of the canopy s imultaneously breaking up into irregular size fragments. The travel distance of the canopy fragments varies from 2.8 metres to 20 metres, depending on the canopy shape. However, the majority of the canopy fragments are propelled upwards and sideways, the area in front of the cockpit remaining comparatively clear. 2551. Operation of the MDC Ex ternal Emergency Cable a.Safety Precautions. Firecrash rescue teams, dr essed in full protective clothing with helmet visor down, outside an area of 2.8 metres are adequately protected from canopy debris when the MDC is operate d. It is therefore essential that 1 Firecrash rescue teams responding to an incident involving aircraft fitted with a MDC are fully dressed in CFFA, with helmet visors down, when making theirapproach to the aircraft. 2 The fully dressed state is not relaxed un til it is clear that it is not necessary for the MDC to be operated, either internally by the occupant, or externally by therescue team. b.Action by FireCr ash Rescue Team. On arrival at the incident involving an aircraft fitted with an MDC, the fo llowing procedures should be followed 1 Approach the cockpit, where possi ble, in full view of the aircrew. 2 Be prepared to react to any signal from the aircrew indicating their intention to operate the MDC. 3 On such a signal, the rescue crew s hould face away from the cockpit, withdraw at least 2.8 metres from, forward of, the coc kpit area. If this is not possible, they should crouch down below the line of the cockpit. c. Where it is necessary for the rescue crew to operate the MDC with the emergency cable, the operator should 1 Ensure that other personnel are clear of the cockpit and are aware of his intentions. 2 Remove the cable from its stowage.3 Move to a position forward of the co ckpit taking up slack of the cable. 4 Then, facing away from the cockpit, lower his head and give the cable a sharp pull to detonate the explosive cord.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-17 Change 1 2552. Break-in Points Break-in points are areas marked on the fuselage where it would be feasible to cut through the airframe to force an entry if necessa ry. As their locations are decided according to the arrangement of internal fittings, they are often awkwardly placed fo r rescue purposes, well above ground level on the outside and well above floor level on the inside. Break-in points are usually rectangular or follow the canopy frame co lour. Their outline is marked by a broken line in contrast colouring ie red on a white surface, yellow on a camouflage surface. On a numberof military aircraft, the break-in points are marked in a contrasting colour keeping in tune withthe aircrafts livery. Fig 25-3. Break-in Point Marking 2553. Rescue of Aircrew and Passengers Once entry to the aircraft has been gained, the first priority is to ensure that ejection seats, if fitted, are made safe by fitting the appropriate safety pins. The next priority is to ensurethat the occupants who require rescuing are s howing the basic signs of life ie breathing and heartbeat and preventing major bleeding. If necessary, basic first aid must be carried out inorder to maintain the life of the aircrew and passengers whilst inside the aircraft. Note. Under no circumstances should an aircrewman s helmet be removed by firecrash rescue teams as this could aggravate, or kill, a person suffering head or neck injuries. Once the two above important tasks have been co mpleted, the necessary fire prevention tasks can be carried out to prevent outbreaks of fire a nd to neutralise potential hazards. These tasks involve, after consultation with aircraft ground support personnel a. Closing down engine throttles andor HP fuel cocks.b. Shutting down the Auxiliary Power Unit APU, if fitted.c. Opening the battery isolation switchs.d. Moving the armament sa fety switchs to OFF.UK RESTRICTED 25-18 UK RESTRICTED2554. In order to be able to neutralise the poten tial hazards listed above , it is necessary for firecrash rescue teams to have a thorough knowledge of the mean s of isolating and making safe hazardous equipment that may be carried on aircraft. Firecrash rescue teams and flight deck party continuation training programmes are to include the procedures for dealing with theirparticular based aircraft. It is emphasised, that firecrash re scue teams should work only within the limits of their knowledge of the airc raft concerned. If they are not fa miliar with the appropriate controls they shoul d await the arrival of qualified personnel. Once the crew and passengers have escaped or been rescued, if a fire subsequently break s out, firecrash rescue teams should not take unnecessary risks to enter an aircraft which becomes seriously involved in fire. 2555. Locating the Fire It is essential to find out exactly where the fire is. Smoke and flame emerging from openings in the airframe are not a wholly reliable indication their emergence is governed byinternal air currents and they ma y have travelled some distance in ternally from any direction. As the airframe fills with smoke, it may emerge anyw here, perhaps giving a false impression of the magnitude of the fire. Other features may help to locate the fire more accurately. For example a. Metal expanding in the heat of the fire makes cracking sounds. This occurs all along the exit route of the flames but it is usually possible to establish the area of origin. b. The aircraft skin becomes heated. Again this happens all along the exit route of the flames but the pattern of blisteri ng of the aircraft finish usua lly reveals the area of origin. 2556. Engine Fires Aircraft engines are complex structures and it is the most common area where fire may occur because of the presence of HP fuel and hot areas. Fires will affect one of two areas of the engine a.Internal. The internal areas of gas turbine engines can be broadly broken down into three areas 1 The Compressor Section. There is no real hazard associated with this area. FOD damage to a compressor blade may cau se friction and heat by compressor rub with the possibility of titanium powder being drawn into the combustionchambers. 2 Combustion Region. The fire hazards associated with this region is small. Instruct the pilot to turn the engine over with the fuel off, apply CO 2 down the intake. If unsuccessful, prepare to cool the region with water on the advice and assistance from an airframe tradesman. 3 The Turbine Region. The most common hazard in the turbine region is a wet start. Check the fuel supply is off and apply CO2 up the exhaust tailpipe. If cooling is required with water, gain advice from the AEO. Cover spilt fuel on thedeck with foam.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-19 Change 1 b.External. The area surrounding the internal areas of the engine contains all the services which the engine requires to operate. This region is termed the accessoryregion. This is the most common area for fire s to originate and is usually served with an internal suppression system BCF. Access to this region may be in the form of fire access panels or by removing airframe panels. The correct fire access panel must befound and CO 2 applied through this access. Fig 25-4. Various Types of Fire Access Panels 2557. Post-Crash Management Royal Navy regulations for post crash mana gement organisation are contained within JSP 318 - Military Flying Regulations and contain specific actions to be taken regarding aircraft with major components manufactured from Man Ma de Mineral Fibres MMMF, ie Composites. 2558. Hangar Fires Instructions for dealing with hangar fires are contained in Chapter 21 and in BR 766C1. 2559. Detailed Ship-Type Information Reactions within ships will vary according to the emergency and will be affected by many factors, eg the range of the aircraft from the ship, the time available before recovery,possible aircraft navigation difficulties, aircraft overdue acti on, priority of other evolutions within the ship, airspace reservations et c. It is for the Command to decide upon the correct course of action needed to recover the aircraft. 2560. Crash on Deck - Immediate Ship Actions The whole-ship actions for a crash on deck are detailed in BR 766C1. A generic guide to reactions by the NBCD organi sation is at Annex A to this Chapter.UK RESTRICTED 25-20 UK RESTRICTED2561. Helicopter Operation s in MMPPs - Firefighting Preparations The minimum firefighting preparations re quired by a MMPP for helicopter operations are a. At Prepare for Flying 1 Rig two foam producing appliances FB5X plus portable inline inductors supplied from separate hydrants to transf er position preferably from separate sides of the ship. 2 Once rigged and foam production has b een proved, the lever on the FB5X is to be turned to the shut position. This will allow the hoses to be fully charged but have the flow shut off at the nozzle. The hoses should be pulled back from the immediate area of transfer. 3 Two waterwall nozzles may also be rigged but turned off ready to provide additional protection to exposed firefighters. 4 Four sets of fearnought suits, boots, gloves and anti-flash should be broken out from the FRPP nearest to transfer positi on, checked and placed in a dry covered position ready for immediate use. There is no requirement to dress firefighters atthis stage. 5 Nominate and brief four personnel fo r duties as helicopter firefighters. 6 HPSW main pressure is to be confirmed above 5 bar 80 psi and pressure maintained throughout the dur ation of flying operations. 7 On completion, report initial prep arations complete to the OOW. b. At the first indication of a possible incident involving the helicopter and the ship, the level of preparati ons should be increased. 1 Dress fearnought suitmen station th em in a sheltered position ready for immediate deployment. 2 Consider an increase in ships watertight integrity and restrictions to movement of personnel about the ship. c. In the unlikely event of the helicopter crashing on the ship, the ship must immediately go to Emergency Stations. Th e nominated firefighters should endeavour to extinguish the fire, supported by the activated Emergency Stations NBCDorganisation, based on the guidance at Annex A. d.Unless the ship has qualified AIR 233 trai ned personnel, no ad-hoc provision should be made to nominate personnel or equipment for an air-crew rescue party.Once the fire is out, or access to helicopt er established, casua lty rescue should be attempted.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25-21 Change 1e. Ships officers should table top and exer cise the organisation and procedures most suitable for their ships ma npower and equipment capabilities. f. Detailed guidance and advice on helicopt er operations and requirements can be sought from COMNA.UK RESTRICTED 25-22 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25A-1 Change 1ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 25 g47 g47 NBCD REACTIONS TO A FLIGHT DECK EMERGENCY g47 g47 1. Introduction g47 This generic guide is based on a DDFF and must be adapted to suit individual ships. It is g47 imperative that all personnel onboa rd understand the procedures to be followed in the event of g47 an aircraft emergency. Correct initial reactions are vital. The OOW is likely to initiate the g47 onboard response to an incident. The ships em barked flight and AIR 233 trained ratings will be g47 first at the scene of the incide nt SOTI but may not have time to complete all necessary actions g47 prior to a Crash on Deck. The SSEP and other ke y personnel must be prep ared to take over the g47 Damage Control and Firefighting effort and safeguard the ship. g47 g47 2. Initial Response g47 The initial indication of an aviation emerge ncy may result in a PRIORITY LANDING order g47 over the flight deck intercom g47 g47 Stand by for Priority Landing, Stand by for Priority Landing g47 g47 Flight personnel will close up and the ship will prepare for flying, if not already at Flying g47 Stations. No reaction is required from the SSEP. g47 g47 3.If the indications from the aircraft are that the problem is serious, then the General Alarm g47 will be sounded and an EMERGENCY LANDING pi pe will be made ove r main broadcast g47 g47 Stand by for Emergency Landing, Stand by for Emergency landing. Forward and Aft FRPPs g47 close up. g47 Clear all personnel from Aft of................. Section g47 Crash Boat Crew and Swimmer of the Watch close up g47 Attack Party muster at.......................... g47 Support Party muster at the Forward FRPP. g47 First Aid Party muster at........................ g47 The aircraft has ...........persons onboard and is armed with .............. Repeat pipe g47 g47 4.If at the point of landing an aircraft cras hes andor catches fire , this may happen without g47 prior warning the CRASH ON DECK pipe will he made g47 g47 Crash on Deck, Crash on Deck g47 Crash stop ventilation. No smoking or naked lights throughout the ship. g47 Hands to Emergency Stations, Hands to Emergency Stations g47 Clear all personnel from aft of Section................. g47 Crash Boat crew and Swimme r of the Watch close up. g47 Attack Party muster at............................. g47 Support Party muster at........................... g47 Containment Party muster at............................ g47 First Aid Party muster at...................... g47 The aircraft has............. persons onboard and it is armed with.......Repeat pipe g47 g47UK RESTRICTED 25A-2 UK RESTRICTED5.If not already on an emergency course, the OOW will turn the ship so as to achieve a relative g47 wind over the flight deck from the port side forw ard to clear the smoke and heat away from the g47 ship. Consider turning on upper deck lighting to assist the SSEP actions. g47 g47 6. SSEP AttackSupport Actions g47 The SSEP Attack Party muster as piped. If time and ship safety allows then the SSEP may g47 prepare hoses on the upper deck and man the foam m onitors if fitted, prior to taking cover. The g47 ic of the SSEP will esta blish the FCP and report its position to HQ1. The SSEP Attack Party g47 members are to support the Flights firefighting t eams efforts. A member of the FlightAIR 233 g47 firefighting team normally the SMR will brief the ic SSEP on the status of the aircraft, crew g47 and firefighting actions. The FB1010 may require re-supply of AFFF to maintain the continuous g47 attack on the fire. g47 g47 7.The SSEP Support Party muster at the Forwar d FRPP and commence dressing at Emergency g47 Landing. They will dress in accordance with st andard practice for a continuous rolling attack. g47 If Crash on Deck is not piped they are to come off air after a face seal check and await further g47 instruction from HQ1. If Crash on Deck is piped they are to proceed to the FCP on air. The g47 ic of the SSEP will direct the Support Party as required. g47 g47 8. SCC Actions g47 SCC personnel are to carry out the following actions g47 g47 a. Crash stop vent. g47 g47 b. Crash stop HP air compressors. g47 g47 c. Start all available fire pumps. g47 g47 d. Confirm Avcat transfer pump shut down. g47 g47 d. Consider starting additional generators and moving load to forward generators. g47 g47 9. Aft FRP Actions g47 The Aft FRP close up when the Emergency Landi ng or Crash on Deck pipe is made. The g47 first priority is carry out a blanket search of the aft section of the ship to ensure personnel are clear g47 and identify the boundary of the incident. The second priority is containment. SSEP g47 Containment Party personnel will be dispatched to the Aft FRPP to assist. The third priority is g47 to prepare a fully dressed Support Team ready to re lieve the SSEP, or to fight any secondary fires. g47 Additional hands from the Forward FRP are to be requested, via HQ1, if needed to augment the g47 Aft FRP actions. It may be necessary for the Aft FRP to conduct re-entry onto the quarterdeck g47 using a fully dressed Support Team. Re-entry to the quarterdeck will only be approved by HQ1 g47 when the flight deck fire has been confirmed ex tinguished. The seaboat may be used to view the g47 quarterdeck if the weather is good. However, the precautionary full re-entry procedure will still g47 be required. The Aft FRP is to nominate one hand to close up at the hangar spray position in case g47 their operation is ordered by HQ1. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 25A-3 Change 110. Forward FRP Actions g47 Forward FRP personnel are to close up and assi st the SSEP Support Party with dressing. g47 Those not involved with dressing the Support Part y act as a pool of manpower to assist the Aft g47 FRP. g47 g47 11. Manpower Control g47 Muster spare manpower and consider dispatchin g four hands immediately to the ic at the g47 FCP to assist with rigging hoses and collecting foam. Manpower will also be required to assist g47 with containment if the Watch on Deck are nominated as Containment Party, they will be g47 required to launch the seaboat. Allocation of any spare hands must be coordinated via HQ1. g47 g47 12. SSEP Containment Actions g47 The SSEP Containment Party will be utilised primarily to provide boundary cooling on the g47 deckhead underneath the flight deck and hangar. Their activities will be coordinated via HQ1 and g47 in liaison with the ic Aft FRP. They may also be required in the vicinity of the hangar magazines g47 should this be deemed necessary by HQ1. g47 g47 13.The Weapons Section Officer WSO is to provide specialist WE advice including the g47 implications of air weapons on the aircraft, in the hangar or maga zines. WSO is to ensure that g47 the hangar magazine OOQ and the Thallium Inci dent Reaction Team muster on hearing the g47 Crash on Deck pipe with keys to access the ha ngar magazines if required. Should the Attack g47 BA find weapon damage, the Thallium team w ill be dressed and calle d forward immediately. g47 g47 14. Flight Deck Crew g47 FlightAir 233 trained personnel are the ships primary Crash on Deck response team. They g47 are to deploy and man the FB1010s, fight the fi re and rescue the airc rew under the direction of g47 the FDO in accordance with BR7661. The Flight SMR will liaise directly with the ic of the g47 SSEP. g47 g47 15. Medical g47 The SSEP First Aid Party is to close up at the Crash on Deck pipe. The ic of the SSEP g47 Attack Party will control the movement of casualties from the flight deck and will call for First g47 Aid Party members as required once the casualties are safely clear of the SOTI. First Aid g47 personnel are to keep clear whilst firefighting e quipment is being rigged by the SSEP and are to g47 transport casualties to the designated casualty handling point once they have been assessed and g47 stabilised. g47 g47UK RESTRICTED 25A-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANK g47 g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-1 Change 3CHAPTER 26 PERSONAL PROTECTION CONTENTS Para A c t i o n D r e s s........................................................ 2602 Substitute Clothing .................................................. 2604 K e y b o a r d O p e r a t o r A n t i - F l a s h G l o v e s ................................... 2605 C h e m i c a l t h r e a t - W e a r i n g o f A n t i - F l a s h.................................. 2607 A c t i o n C o v e r a l l ..................................................... 2608 B r a s s a r d s .......................................................... 2611 P r o b a n T r e a t e d F l a m e R e t a r d a n t G a r m e n t s .............................. 2612 Action Dress for Embarked Military Forces ............................... 2614 g47 I m m e r s i o n C o v e r a l l .................................................. 2615 S h i p F i r e f i g h t i n g C l o t h i n g ............................................. 2621 Fearnought Suit ..................................................... 2622 F i r e f i g h t i n g B o o t s ................................................... 2624 S h i p F i r e f i g h t e r s H o o d ............................................... 2625 Firefighters Helmet with Built-in Communications FFHBC ................ 2626 F i r e f i g h t i n g P r o t e c t i o n i n a n N B C E n v i r o n m e n t ............................ 2627 A i r c r a f t F i r e f i g h t i n g C l o t h i n g .......................................... 2630 C r a s h F i r e f i g h t i n g E n s e m b l e C F F E .................................... 2631 C l e a n i n g C F F E...................................................... 2639 R e p o r t s o f D e f e c t i v e P r o t e c t i v e C l o t h i n g ................................. 2650 H e a t S t r e s s ......................................................... 2660 A l l e v i a t i o n o f H e a t S t r e s s ............................................. 2661 P r o t e c t i n g t h e B o d y f r o m I n j u r y ........................................ 2670 Brace Drill ......................................................... 2671BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-3 Change 1CHAPTER 26 PERSONAL PROTECTION 2601. This chapter covers personal protective clothing for action, damage control and firefighting. Breathing appara tus is covered in Chapter 27 a nd individual protective equipment g47 IPE for NBC hazards is covered in BR 21702. 2602. Action Dress At Action and Defence Stations all personnel are to wear Action Dress. The basic Action Dress is as follows a. Cotton Underwear. Personnel are advise d to avoid wearing undergarments made from nylon, thermoplastics and polyester, even in peacetime. The most practical material for undergarments is plain cotton although wool and materials derived from cellulose eg rayon are also melt hazard free. b. Thick wool-rich black socks.c. DMS boots.d. Flame retardant action coverall. g47 e. Flame retardant anti-flash gloves and hood. Gloves are to be worn over the g47 coverall sleeve. The hood bib is to be tucked into the neck of the coverall. At Defence Stations the hood may be worn around the neck. f. In temperate or cold climates flame retardant FR No 4 shirt and trousers or FR g47 overalls blue or white may be worn under the FR action coverall. This measure g47 provides an additional insulatin g layer for personnel in positions where cold is a problem g47 and aids survival prospects in the event of abandonment in cold conditions. It must g47 however be balanced against the fact that no significant additional protection from burns g47 is provided and that it can increase the risk of heat illness in warner climates, or if g47 personnel undertake heavy or prolonged physical work. g47 2603. Selected items from the following list may be worncarried in addition to Action Dress, when appropriate a. Rankrate shoulder badges.b. Lifejacket.c. Survival suit.d. NBC respirator in haversack with cont ents in accordance with BR 21702. Only required if an N, B or C threat exists. e. Brassard, for identification.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-4 UK RESTRICTEDf. ELSA. Only if ordered for a specific function, eg patrols. g. Identity discs stainless steel. Only when ordered.h. NBC protective suit, gloves and overboots IPE.i. NBC decontamination suit.j. Foul weather clothing.k. Flight deck clothing.l. Immersion coverall.m. Protective helmet. 2604. Substitute Clothing When dressed in full firefighting rig the following clothing substitution is authorized a. Firefighters boots for DMS boots. g47 b. Firefighters gloves for anti-flash gloves. g47 Note. Firefighters standing by at Action sta tions should wear the anti-flash hood, as it g47 gives better facial protection than the fire fighters hood, when BA is not being worn. g47 c. Fearnought suit for action cove rall if No 4s or overalls are being worn in accordance g47 with Para 2602. g47 2605. Keyboard Operator Anti-Flash Gloves Kid leather anti-flash gloves ar e provided for selected keyboa rd operators in areas such as the Operations Room. The fl ame retardant FR treatment will last for the serviceable life of g47 the gloves. Gloves must not, however, become badly soiled or permanently stained since such depositsdefects reduce the FR properties and decrease the protection afforded. 2606. The gloves may be cleaned by careful hand washing as follows a. Synthetic detergents of known suitability ar e to be used. This can be determined from the instructions on the labels of proprie tary products. Either they say clearly that the product is suitable for FR garments or su itability is indicated by saying how to wash FR garments or garments with FR finishes. b. Do not use soap or washing products containing soap. The use of soap is to be avoided because it can cause an accumulation of flammable deposits on garments. c. Do not boil.d. Do not bleach.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-5 Change 3e. Do not use fabric conditioner. f. Do not leave gloves to soak.g. Use warm water maximum temperature 50C.h. Don the gloves and wet them thoroughly.i. Carefully lather the leather portion of the gloves as if washing the hands cotton sections may be rubbed together or with a separate piece of wet cloth. j. Remove the gloves and thoroughly rinse in several changes of clean lukewarm water. It is important to continue rinsing until the water is clear. k. Remove excess water by squ eezing it out never wring it out. l. Pull the gloves into shape carefully blow into them to separate the surfaces.m. Hang the gloves away from direct heat, or sunlight, to dry.n. When nearly dry, restore their softness, shape and size, by working them on the hands, then re-hang until completely dry. 2607. Chemical Threat - We aring of Anti-Flash When the Chemical Safety Rule is in force, upper deck guns crews are to wear IPE at a dress state appropriate to the threat. In Dress States Zero, One, Two and Three anti-flash is to g47 be worn. NBC Dress States are defined in BR 21702. Personnel within the Citadel, whether g47 wearing IPE or not are to wear anti-flash. For those in the Citadel and dressed in IPE the anti- flash hood is to be worn instead of the IPE hood and anti-flash gloves are to be donned instead of the IPE outer gloves. In the event of a citadel breach and a chemical hazard the anti-flashhood is to be removed, the NBC respirator donned and the IPE hood pulled up. When personnel wearing IPE with anti-flash are a bout to leave the citadel, they are to remove the anti-flash and don the remaining IPE protection gl oves and respirator with hood up. g47 2608. Action Coverall The action coverall is a double-layered flame retardant garment which is to be worn during hostilities and firefighting only. The coverall may be mared in felt tip, for theidentification of personnel, on the left breast pocket flap only. Air maintenance rating action coveralls, which do not have breas t pockets, are not to be marke d. For exercise purposes blue or white FR overalls over No 4 trousers and shirt are to be worn to stimulate the two FR layersof the action coverall. 2609. Personnel employed on duties in support of 4 5 man firefighting t eams may be dressed in an action coverall ensemble see below at the discretion of the Firefighting SupervisingOfficer, although any person required to transit th e ship protector waterwall to gain access to a compartmentscene of the fire must be in full firefighting rig. The action coverall firefightingensemble includes the following additional itemsBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-6 UK RESTRICTEDa. Cotton underwear. b. Woollen socks.c. Firefighters hood.d. Firefighting gloves.e. Firefighters helmet.f. Leather firefighting boots.g. Breathing apparatus.h. No 4s, if worn in accordance with Para 2602. 2610. Due to the limited space available in FRPP lo ckers and the requirement that only clean oil-free action coveralls are used for firefighting, they are to be drawn from Naval Stores at thediscretion of the Firefighting Supervising Officer. To facilitate this it is recommended that aselection of action cove ralls in various sizes are dispersed within the ships storerooms for immediate use. Action coveralls are also to be stored in the upper deck re-entry locker.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-7 Change 3 Fig 26-1. Action Coverall in Action Dress 2611. Brassards Brassards are to be worn on the right upper arm, over action covera lls, to denote the following functions a.Red. Damage control personnel except heavy L. b.Green. Heavy L personnel.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-8 UK RESTRICTEDc.Orange. BA Controllers Yellow brassards are not codified. d.Pink. Weapon Repair Teams. e.Red Cross on White. First Aid Teams. f.White. Marked to indicate key personnel. 2612. Proban Treated Fl ame Retardant Garments The following garments have Proba n flame retardant FR treatment a. No 4 shirt and trousers.b. Anti-flash hood and gloves.c. Ratings blue overalls.d. Officers white overalls.e. Action coveralls. 2613. The effectiveness of this FR treatment depends on garment cleanliness, so correct laundering in accordance with the garment care la bel is therefore essen tial. BR 1277 - Laundry Manual provides guidance for laundry processes. Heavy duty deterg ent powder is to be used in the laundering process maximum wash temperat ure 60. General purpose detergent powder contains a bleaching agent, so should be avoi ded if possible. Soap or washing products containing soap are not to be used. It is especially important to avoid soiling by oils and greases,which impair the flame-retardant qualities of the fabric. Severely soiled garments are to be g47 returned to stores. 2614. Action Dress for Embarked Military Forces g47 1. Combat Soldier 95 CS95 worn by Embarked Military Forces14 g47 2. EMF is not Fire Retardant FR and may increase the risk of burn injury if g47 exposed to flame. To provide protection appropriate to risks when in the Action g47 State, and to correspond with the protecti on provided afforded to RN personnel, all g47 EMF personnel are to be issued with one Action Coverall, one anti-flash hood and g47 one pair of anti-flash gloves as soon as pr acticable to cover an y contingencies which g47 may arise. These are to be worn when prescribed by the Command in accordance g47 with the guideline below. The action coveralls are environmentally sealed and the g47 packages should not be broached until re quired in accordance with the guidelines g47 g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-9 Change 3a. Action Dress and anti-flash is to be worn during the following ship states g47 g47g47 Risk g47 Ship State g47 Dress g47 Low g47 STATE 3 Cruising Watches g47 CS 95 g47 Medium 1 g47 STATE 2 Defence Watches g47 CS 95 anti-flash hood g47 and gloves carried g47 Medium 2 g47 STATE 2 Defence Watches g47 and a credible risk to the ship g47 exists g47Action coverall, anti- g47 flash worn hood down g47 High g47 STATE 1 Action Stations and g47 a credible risk to the ship exists g47Action coverall, anti- g47 flash worn hood up g47 b. It is acceptable to wear items of CS 95 under the coverall but additional clothing g47 other than underwear should only be necessa ry in extreme cold weather. Underwear g47 and other garments worn under coveralls shoul d, ideally, be made fro m natural fibres eg g47 cotton. However, there is no evidence that man made fibres such as polyester are g47 hazardous when worn next to the skin since these are protected by the two layers of the g47 action coverall. g47 g47 c. It is recognised that EMF personnel will have to change back into CS 95 perhaps g47 many hours before disembarkati on when the ship might be at greatest risk. However, g47 personnel should try to delay changing until as late as possible and wear anti-flash hood g47 and gloves, if possible, with CS 95 until disembarked. Ships will need to exercise the g47 wearing of different levels of protection at Assault St ations and develop SOPs to g47 minimise the impact any changes in dr ess states will have upon operations. g47 g47 d. The wearing of CS 95 when there is no risk to the ship is considered safe. However, g47 irrespective of the readiness state of the ship, other items of FR clothing such as Action g47 Working Dress, should be worn by EMF if wo rking for significant periods in machinery g47 spaces or fuelled aircraft. In these areas the risk from fire is greater than in other areas g47 of the ship and EMF personnel should be dr essed appropria tely to minimise burn injury. g47 g47 2615. Immersion Coverall Orange immersion coveralls are provided for damage repair personnel working in partially flooded compartments. The three sizes ar e generously cut, to be worn over action dress, including DMS boots. Extended wearing of the c overalls should be avoide d due to the risk of heat stress. The wearing of action coveralls is not necessary when immersion coveralls are worn,although the double layer could provide additiona l insulation in exceptionally cold conditions.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-10 UK RESTRICTED2616. Brief instructions for care in use and for repair of immersion coveralls are printed on each garment. More comprehensive information is given below a. As necessary after each occasion of w ear, the coveralls should be sponged or washed in water at a temperature not exceeding 50C and placed on hangers to dry.Soap or detergent may be used and, if necessary, the whole garment may be hand or machine washed, the zip being closed prior to washing. Bleach must not be applied andgarments should not be ironed or dry cleaned. b. To avoid damage from creas ing, coveralls should if po ssible be stowed on hangers when not in use. Alternatively they may be stowed lightly folded provided they are cleanand have been thoroughly dried. c. Zips should be kept lubricated with para ffin wax. If a zip becomes defective the coverall should be return ed to Naval Stores. d. Damaged coveralls can be repaired with orange fabric see BR 21703 and impact adhesive. 2617-2620. Spare. 2621. Ship Firefighting Clothing Firefighting protective clothing is designed to give the wearer protection against radiant heat and flame, but only for limited periods. It will not protect from the effects of exposure togreat heat for long periods. Th e protective clothing also redu ces heat loss from the body and, as a consequence, heat stress increases, possibly lead ing to heat exhaustion and collapse. The safety of personnel working in heat depends on the co rrect approach to the problem, good training, discipline and careful supervis ion. Personnel who are to wear protective clothing must be regularly practised in its use. Protective clothing must be examined regularly and maintained ingood order. There are three le vels of ship firefighting rig a.Basic Firefighting Rig. This consists of Proban treated cotton No 4s or cotton overalls, DMS boots, cotton underwear and co ttonwoollen socks see Fig 26-2. When engaged in firefighting operations, collars should be buttoned up and the sleeves rolled down with cuffs buttoned. Man- made materials should not be worn by firefighters, eg Nylon, Polyester or Lycra. During hostilitie s, the action coverall is substituted for No 4s or FR overalls in the Basic Firefighting Rig. b.Intermediate Firefighting Rig. The intermediate firefighting rig consists of the basic firefighting rig, plus BA, firefigh ters hood and anti-flash goves see Fig 26-3. It is used by the Attack Party BA wearers. A set of firefighters hood and anti-flash gloves is to be stowed in each BA locker to facilitate the change from basic firefighting rig.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-11 Change 3 c.Full Firefighting Rig. This consists of basic firefighting rig, plus firefighters g47 hood, fearnought suit, firefighters gloves, fire fighters stockings, firefighting boots, BA and FFHBC see Fig 26-4. The Team Leader also carries a TIC. Fig 26-2. Basic Firefighting RigBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-12 UK RESTRICTEDFig 26-3. Intermediate Firefighting RigUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-13 Change 3Fig 26-4. Full Firefighting RigBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-14 UK RESTRICTED2622. Fearnought Suit Fearnought provides a large measure of prot ection against radiated heat but is not fireproof and will scorch if subjected to intense heat. The suits are treated with Zirpro to makethem flame retardant FR, and they are unlikely to catch fire when in contact with flame. 2623. The Zirpro FR treatment is designed to last the life of the garment, provided the washing instructions on the garment are fo llowed. BR 1277 provides guidance for laundry processes. It is not possible to re-treat made up garments by th e Zirpro process. The garment should be washed as required for reasons of hygien e, and at intervals not exceeding 2 years. It is especially important to avoid soiling by oils and greases, which impair the flame-retardantqualities of the fabric. Soap or washing products containing soap are not to be used. Severely soiled garments are to be returned to stores. 2624. Firefighting Boots Leather firefighting boots are provided in a ra nge of sizes for ship firefighting teams. The boots should be carefully dried after contact w ith water, and cleaned with G Wax. Insoles should be removed from boots occasionally so that they, and the boots, can be aired separately. The insoles should be cleaned by washing in warm soapy water boiling water must not be used. They should be shaken, not wrung out, and then a llowed to dry. When worn out they must not be destroyed by burning as this will produce toxic fumes. 2625. Ship Firefighters Hood The firefighters hood is compatible with EDBA and FFHBC, and also with the S10 respirator. It has a yoke which is tucked in side the shirtoverallsfearnought suit. The hood is made from an inherently flame-retardant FR material and may be washed, as for synthetics, ona medium wash cycle it is not to be bleached. 2626. Firefighters Helmet with Bu ild-in Communications FFHBC Head protection for firefighters is provi ded by the FFHBC, which is worn over the firefighters hood and EDBA head harness. Gu idance on the use of the helmet-mounted radio and associated hand-held radio is contained in Chapter 9 and use of the FFHBC by the Support Party is covered in Chapter 20. Full details of the he lmet and associated ra dios are contained in BR 9215. Helmets are to be stowed in the top le ft hand corner of nominated BA lockers, facing towards the locker hinges. Care must be taken when stowing helmets, to minimise compression g47 of fittings. Radios in stowed helmets are to be set to the FF mode, switched off and set toChannel 1. Lockers containing FFHBC are to be identified by a 50mm wide horizontal yellow band around all visible external surfaces, 50mm from the top. In ships where it is not convenient g47 to stow FFHBCs in BA lockers, they may be stowed in a suitable alternative location eg adjacent g47 to FRPPs. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-15 Change 3Fig 26-5. FFHBC 2627. Firefighting Protection in an NBC Environment Protection for firefighters in an NBC environment varies according to the hazard a.Firefighting Between Decks in an NBC Environment. Firefighters should wear normal action working dress w ithwithout fearnought. IPE clothing suit and rubber gloves is not required to be worn under the fearnought suit and firefighters gloves. All fearnought suit personnel mu st, however, have access to BA and NBC respirator, and be well practised in the procedures for chan ging over from one to the other, as detailed in Annex 21H. b.Firefighting on the Upper Deck in an NBC Environment Vapour Hazard. If the NBC hazard is from vapour alone, then fire fighters dressed as in para a. above and wearing BA will have adequate short term protection for the duration of their firefightingtask. As for between decks, the respirator must be readily available with the BAController and firefighters must be practised in the procedures for changing to and from BA, as detailed in Annex 21H. c.Firefighting on the Upper Deck in an NBC Environment Liquid Hazard. In the unlikely event of having to fight a seri ous fire on the upper deck, in an NBC liquid environment, then all firefighting is to be conducted from behind a waterwall using the following personal protection 1 No 4soveralls.2 Action Coverall.3 BA.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-16 UK RESTRICTED4 IPE with the hood pulled up around the BA mask flammable, but protects against liquid hards. d.Firefighting in a Nuclear Particulate Hazard Environment. The clothing regimes used for firefighting in NBC vapour hazard apply equally well when firefighting in the presence of nuclear fallout hazar d. The same clothing regimes used with respirators or BA will provide personal protection against particles which may emitAlpha and Beta radiation. Th e Protection Officer will however need to consider stay- times for personnel exposed to Gamma radiation. 2628. The procedures for undressing and cleansing after firefighting in an NBC environment are detailed in the Annexes to Chapter 14 of BR 21702. 2629. Spare. 2630. Aircraft Firefighting Clothing Naval aircraft firefighters are provided w ith different protective clothing from ship firefighters, due to the different conditions encount ered at the scene of an aircraft fire. Crash firefighting ensemble CFFE can protect the wearer from radiant heat and flame licks, but is notdesigned to allow deliberate entry into a flame mass. The clothing is not gas-tight, and thewearer inhales the surrounding air, so he mu st remain in a position where he is clear of superheated gases and toxic fumes. The clothing is designed as a composite outfit, and the complete outfit must be worn correctly to gain the maximum protection. There is, however, no objection to the wearing of an additional cotton- based T-shirt or No 4s over the underwear. Man- made fibres should not be worn. The protection from heat given by this clothing is subject to a time limit in severe conditions because the he at is conducted although slowly through the layers of fabric. 2631. Crash Firefighting Ensemble CFFE The stock numbers and allowances for CFFE items are listed in BR 21703. The full ensemble is shown at Fig 26-6. It comprises the following items a. Tunic.b. Trousers.c. Boots.d. Hood.e. Helmet.f. T Shirt.g. Crop-top females only.h. Trunks.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-17 Change 3 i. Gloves. j. Aircrew fire-retardant socks. Fig 26-6. Crash Firefighting Ensemble 2632. The suit incorporates a waterproof lining to provide protection from water spray and rain. However, wetting of the clothing does not give better protection against heat, and if the clothingis soaked, the conduction of heat will be quicker and the possibility of scalds is rather greater than the possibility of burns with dry clothing. 2633. The correct fitting of the suit is of great importance in order to provide the maximum protection. The suit should be a loose fit to ensu re adequate airflow around the inside of the suit during movement of the body. If the suit is tight in areas, such as the shoulders, across the chest or back, at the waist and the top of the legs, the circulation of air is restricted which may allowBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-18 UK RESTRICTEDthe still air to heat up at a faster rate thereb y reducing the time of limit of protection. The length of the tunic should be such that when the ar ms are raised above the head, no exposed areas should be created between the bottom of the tunic a nd the top of the trousers. The length of the trousers should be that the bottom of the leg is at the level of the ankle in order to ensureadequate overlap between the boots and the trous ers to prevent the creation of exposed areas when lifting the legs during climbing. 2634. The underwear, which consists of a T-shirt a nd trunks for male fire fighters and T-shirt, trunks and crop top for female firefighters, is made from 100 cotton. The underwear is to be worn next to the skin and has a primary func tion of providing support and maintaining hygiene and modesty. It also provides a nother layer of thermal insulation. 2635. A Gallet helmet gives full protection with two visors that slide into the top of the helmet. The inner visor is for eye protection while the outer visor gives full face protection againstradiated heat. 2636. Firesuitmen on single spot ships are to wear ear plugs when wearing the Gallet helmet. The fire-hood is worn between the head and th e helmet, thereby giving added protection and ensuring that the ear plugs are not dislodged wh en the helmet is removed, causing a FOD hazard. 2637. The gloves are made from leather with an aluminised surface on the back of the hands and fingers to reflect radiant heat. The gloves allow, without their removal, manipulation ofreasonably small articles. There is a spring band within the fabr ic around the wrist to secure the glove to the hand, and a long cuff to provide an adequate overlap over the sleeve of the jacket even when the arm is stretched. 2638. The boots are of a short, calf-l ength, step-in shape. The uppers are made from reversed chrome leather with a chrome lining. A steel toe cap and sole bar are inserted and the sole andheel is a one-piece moulding of neoprene which is resistant to high temperatures and the solventeffects of hydrocarbon fuels. The moulding pattern s of the sole and heel are designed to achieve a good grip on smooth surfaces and prevent the picking up of items in the tread which mayconstitute foreign object damage FOD hazards. 2639. Cleaning CFFE The ensemble is to be cleaned as follows a.Helmet. Wash with soapy water and polish helmet and visors with a lint cloth. b.Fire Hood. Wash as per manufacturers instru ctions and change after 10 washes. c.Suit. Wash as per manufacturers instructions not dry cleaned. d.Boots. Wash with hot soapy wate r and allow to dry naturally. e.Gloves. Wipe clean using a wet clot h and allow to dry naturally. 2640-2649. SpareUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-19 Change 32650. Reports of Defective Protective Clothing On receipt of a failed item at the unit clothing store a judgement is to be made concerning the nature of the failure. Where a fa ilure is judged to have occurred through misuse, negligence or fair wear and tear, appropriate actions is to be taken within the unit. If it isconsidered that the item has failed for other reasons, the item together with a Clothing FailureReport Form is to besent to the Quality Support Manager, DCT IPT, Caversfield, Bicester, OX27 8TS. Multiple failures in the same range may be reported on a single Clothing FailureReport Form but all failed items are to be sent together with the form. 2651-2659. Spare. 2660. Heat Stress Detailed instructions for heat stress monito ring are in Chapter 11 of BR 21702. A simple endurance guide for medium and heavy work loads in warm and hot climates is at Table 26-1. The balance between clothing pr otection and work rates should be carefully considered. The following notes ar e relevant when using the table a. Personnel should be fit and acc limatised to local conditions. b. Medical officers should be consulted and involved in monitoring personnel. c. Fluid intake is vital and should be enc ouraged especially during rest periods even if personnel do not feel thirsty. As a roug h guide at least one litre per hour per person is required. d. If an action coverall is being worn, do not remove it. Removal will assist heat loss but the risk from flash, etc is too great. e. Remove fearnought whenever possible, or at least unzip it during rest periods. f. Rest in a cooler shaded area. g47 g. The upper deck should be kept wet. g47 h. Maintain an air flow over the deck a nd use of awnings should be considered. g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-20 UK RESTRICTEDTable 26-1. Heat Stress - A Guide to A voidance in Various Clothing Regimes Rig ClimateWorkRest Ratio-MinutesRemarks No 4s or overalls Hot Warm10530 120151. Rest in a cool shady area. 2. Remove fearnought where possible. 3. Enforce drinking at rest. g47 4. When action coverall is top g47 layer, do not remove.No 4s Action coverallHot Warm4530 3030 after 2 cycles4515 Action coverall only Hot Warm4530 3030 after 2 cycles7515 No 4s NBC IPE Hot Warm4530 3030 after 2 cycles4515, 4530alternatingcycles Action coverall NBC IPEHot Warm3030 3045 after 1st cycle4530 No 4s fearnought Hot Warm3090 30903 team system 3 entries only.Rest includes dressing time Note. Warm climate approximates to conditions likely to be found in air conditioned spaces 26C. The hot climate approximates to conditions 30C on the upper deck and in the poorly ventilated areas such as machinery spaces, hangar or galley of a ship in tropical waters. 2661. Alleviation of Heat Stress When suffering from heat stress and at ri sk of heat illness, personnel should immerse their hands and wrists forearms if possible in water between 10 and 20C whilst resting for 20 minutes. This will reduce heat stress, lower the risk of heat injury, and increase safe total worktimes that personnel can undertake. If rest periods are shorter or repeated workrest cycles are anticipated then 10C water should be used in pref erence. If the reduction in heat stress is critical and rest times less than 20 minutes then immersion of both hands and feet in 10C water couldbe attempted, although it should be noted that the increased bene fit is small a nd only equivalent to increasing rest time by 2-5 minutes over usin g hand immersion. The risk of accidental injury to the feet, increased re-dressing time and a greater requirement for chilled water associated withimmersing the feet make this option unlikely to be preferable. 2662-2669. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-21 Change 32670. Protecting the Body from Injury When an explosion occurs in, or near, a sh ip there is a danger to personnel from blast, flying debris and the whipping action of the hu ll. This may also occur during a collision. In order to minimize injuries to personnel caused by these effects the following precautions are to be taken a. For prolonged periods under threat at NB CD State 1, pe rsonnel not directly involved with fighting the ship are to be dispersed in pairs, or small groups, throughout the ship, avoiding potential blast routes and covering all decks and all sections if possible. This will provide the facility to conduct an immediate, and more effective, blanket search after action damage, and minimiz e casualties in any one place. b. When an attack is imminent the order BRACE, BRACE, BRACE is to be broadcast by the Command. 2671. Brace Drill On hearing the command BRACE, BRACE, BRACE a. All personnel not directly involved in fi ghting the ship or in the most protected positions, ie a bunk or a fixed chair, are to stand, face away from any loose material, bend knees, lift heels off the deck and, with be nt arms, take a firm grip from beneath a fixed object at waist height. The head, neck and back should remain in a straight vertical line to absorb the effect of shock from the deck. b. Operations Rooms personnel who are seat ed during periods of attack and those similarly seated and who are not directly invol ved in repulsing an attack are to carry out the following procedures 1 Personnel sitting in front of a VDU, unle ss directly repulsing an attack, should close their eyes and extend an ti-flash hoods to cover the face. 2 Firmly grip the sides of their chair seat with both hands. All chairs which are required for action must be securely fitted to the deck. 3 Where possible, the chair should be ro tated so that lower limbs are not trapped between the chair and the console. 4 Lift heels and keep head, neck and back in a vertical line.Note. In the case of a nuclear air burst, personnel on the upper deck should carry out the Take Cover Drill detailed in BR 21702.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 26-22 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-1 Change 1CHAPTER 27 BREATHING APPARATUS CONTENTS Para C a t e g o r i e s o f B r e a t h i n g A p p a r a t u s ...................................... 2701 SECTION 1 - EXTENDED DURATION BREATHING APPARATUS Introduction ........................................................ 2704 D e s c r i p t i o n......................................................... 2705 S t o w a g e ........................................................... 2706 D u r a t i o n ........................................................... 2707 E x t e n s i o n E q u i p m e n t................................................. 2708 B A C o n t r o l......................................................... 2709 Donning and Functional Checks ........................................ 2710 Face Seal Check ..................................................... 2712 C o m p l e t i o n o f t h e C o n t r o l B o a r d ....................................... 2713 M M P P 2 - P e r s o n A t t a c k B A C o n t r o l B o a r d f o r E D B A ...................... 2714 g47 B A T o t e B o a r d...................................................... 2715 g47 SECTION 2 - EMERGENCY LIFE SUPPORT APPARATUS g47 P u r p o s e a n d F u n c t i o n................................................. 2740 D e s c r i p t i o n......................................................... 2741 O p e r a t i n g I n s t r u c t i o n s ................................................ 2742 M a i n t e n a n c e........................................................ 2745BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-3 Change 1CHAPTER 27 BREATHING APPARATUS 2701. Categories of Breathing Apparatus There are two categories of breathing apparatus used in Royal Navy surface vessels and Royal Fleet Auxiliaries a.Breathing Apparatus Damage Control and Firefighting. This is the generic term used to describe the breathing apparatu s BA used by damage repair parties and firefighters. Extended Duration Breathing Apparatus EDBA is the current g47 BADCFF. g47 b.Emergency Life Support Apparatus ELSA. This is only to be used for escape from, or through, smoke-logged compartments. It is not suitable for use by firefighters. 2702-2703. Spare.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-4 UK RESTRICTED SECTION 1 - EXTENDED DURATION BREATHING APPARATUS 2704. Introduction Extended Duration Breathing Apparatus EDB A has a low magnetic signature and is g47 suitable for use in all Royal Navy ships incl uding Hunt Class and Single Role Minehunters, submarines and RFAs. Full deta ils are contained in BR 82231. Fig 27-1. EDBA and Rescue Mask g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-5 Change 3 2705. Description EDBA is a positive pressure, first-breath activated, lightweight, low maintenance set, fitted with a 9 litre air cylinder free air capacity 2430 litres capable of being charged to 300 bar. The set comprises a one-size face mask with a ne t head harness see Fig 27-2, an ergonomically designed backplate with a comfortable flame retardant harness see Fig 27-3, a lightweightcomposite air cylinder, a high pressure reducing valve, a warning whistle and a pressure gauge. The face mask assembly is fitted with an oro- nasal mask, an exhalati on valve incorporating a speech diaphragm, and an automatic first-breat h operated positive pressure demand valve. The demand valve is designed to be re-set by pre ssing the black rubber re-set button on the demand valve. This closes off air to the face mask, enabling it to be removed. The demand valve is alsofitted with a manually ope rated bypass knob, which allows a free flow of air into the face mask, in case the wearer gets into difficulty. A bulb horn distress alarm is to be attached to the leftshoulder strap of the EDBA set. Fig 27-2. Face Mask Assembly 2706. Stowage EDBA is stowed, in modified BASCCA lockers, ready for immediate use, with all straps fully extended. A tally, detailing th e functional and face seal checks, is attached inside the locker door. Control boards are stowed in selected lo ckers, which are identified by a 50 mm wide white band on the front and sides, 50 mm from the base of the locker. The distribution of control boards is to be detailed in ships NBCD Orders. The set number tally is attached to the D ringon the left shoulder strap of a stowed EDBA.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-6 UK RESTRICTED Fig 27-3. Back Plate and Harness 2707. Duration To maximise duration, EDBA should be charge d to the highest pressure available from the HP air system, up to a maximum of 300 bar. However, most ships do not have a HP air g47 system that is capable of achieving this pressure and are therefore to charge EDBA to the g47 maximum working pressure of their system up to 300 bar. EDBA are to be charged when the g47 system ringmain is at maximum pressure. To allow a tolerance for daily checks, cylinder g47 pressures in stowed EDBA sets may be allowed to fall to 10 bar below the full charge, eg if the g47 HP air ringmain delivers 270 bar, stowed EDBA sets are to be charged to 270 bar but may be g47 allowed to fall to 260 bar before r echarging. Ships are to ensure that the HP air ringmain is at g47 maximum pressure when EDBA daily checks are carried out. The duration varies with air g47 pressure, as follows a.300 bar 48 min working duration 12 min whistle 60 min. b.240 bar 39 min working duration 12 min whistle 51 min. c.207 bar 33 min working duration 12 min whistle 45 min. d.200 bar 32 min working duration 12 min whistle 44 min. e.160 bar 24 min working duration 12 min whistle 36 min. Notes1. The warning period will be 12 minutes only if the whistle is correctly set at 55 bar, and will depend on the individual wearer and the task being carried out. 2. These times exceed the work periods for action coveralls or No 4s and fear nought in Table 26-1, so heat stress will normally limit operations before BA endurance.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-7 Change 12708. Extension Equipment Extension equipment for EDBA see Fig 27-1 comprises a rescue mask RM assembly with head harness, a 2 metre extension hose a nd a 15 metre extension hose. These items are stowed in a red locker, which has a drop-down door . A tally on the inside of the door gives the operating instructions. Two 15 me tre extension hoses can be connected together to give a maximum length of 30 metres. The 2 metre hose is not to be added to this 30 metre length. 2709. BA Control When EDBA sets are used operationally, a BA Controller must be detailed. The duties of a BA Controller are detailed in Chapter 20. 2710. Donning and Functional Checks While stowed in its locker, the EDBA must be maintained in a state of readiness for immediate use, with the air cylinder fully charged to the correct working pressure. Approvalmust be obtained from the officer in charge of firefighting DCO or OOD, prior to using a set g47 if the pressure is below the minimum approved operating pr essure of 160 bar. 2711. With assistance from the BA Controller, the wearer dons the set as follows a. Remove the face mask from the stowage clip. Place the face mask neck strap over the head and allow the face mask to hang on the chest. The neck strap must be wornunder the firefighters hood. g47 b. Release the bands securing the set in its locker, and pass the right arm through the right shoulder strap. Lift the set clear of th e locker and pass the left arm through the left shoulder strap. c. Adjust the shoulder straps by pulling them down and towards the rear. Fasten the waist belt and chest strap, taki ng care not to overtighten. d. Check that the bypass knob is off and the demand valve DV reset button is pressed. e. Open the cylinder valve fully and check th at the warning whistle sounds briefly. If the whistle is not heard to operate when the cylinder valve is opened 1 Shut the cylinder valve. Open the bypass knob to reduce pressure to 55 bar, at which point the whistle should sound. 2 Close the bypass knob. If the whistle still does not operate, it is defective and the set must not be used. The BA Coordinator must be informed. f. On completion of the test, open the cylinder valve fully. The BA Controller removes and retains the set number tally, and enters the w earers name on the control g47 board.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-8 UK RESTRICTED2712. Face Seal Check When the wearer is required to commence a task, the following routine is to be carried out a. Place the chin in the chin cup, pull the h ead harness back over the head and tighten the head harness straps. b. Inhale sharply to activate the DV first- breath mechanism, then breathe normally. c. Twist the DV gently to confirm that the locking catch is fully engaged.d. Open the DV bypass knob and check that ther e is a free flow of air into the mask. Set the bypass knob to off. e. Shut the cylinder valve and then quickly open it one quarter of a turn. Take a deep breath. Shut the cylinder valv e and check that there is no sound of escaping air, and that the pressure gauge reading does not fall by more than 10 bar one division on the dial in 10 seconds. f. Open the cylinder valve fully, breathe normally and check that the gauge reading is g47 steady. If it is not, check that the cylinder valve is fully open. If the gauge fluctuateswhen the cylinder valve is fully open, do not use the set. g. Test the distress alarm.h. Pull up the firefighters hood, check prot ective clothing and proceed on task. g47 Notes 1. If the wearer is not require d immediately, take a deep br eath and press the black rubber reset button on the DV to close off air to the face mask. Remove the face mask and allow it to hang on the chest. 2. The face seal check must be performed each time a wearer dons the face mask for operational purposes. 3. On completion of the face seal check, the BA Controller must enter, on the control board, the time at which the wearer starts to breathe from the set.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-9 Change 1 Fig 27-4. EDBA Control Board 2713. Completion of the Control Board The BA Controller is to carry out the following instructions after the firefighting team has been briefed by the offi cerrating ic of firefighting a.Entry Instructions 1 Remove the set number tally from the BA and clip in onto the control board see Fig 27-4. 2 Before the wearer enters, complete his details in columns A, B and C. The abbreviations to be used in the task column are FF for all members of firefightingteams, BC for boundary coolers and SAR for search and rescue teams. g47 3 Confirm a face seal check.4 Check that the wearers dress is correct.5 Check the wearers personal distress device.6 Turn the dial to set the cylinder pre ssure B window over the minute of start time from column C. 7 Read off and enter times in columns D, E and F.8 Repeat for each BA wearer. Stay at the entry point.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-10 UK RESTRICTEDb.Exit Instructions 1 Remove the set number tally and replace it on the BA set.2 Erase the wearers details from the control board. g47 3 The wearer is to be debriefed by the person ic of firefighting at the FCP, and g47 is then to report to the BA Coor dinator for removal of the BA set. g47 2714. MMPP 2 - Person Attack BA Control Board for EDBA g47 In all MMPPs, the Duty Senior Rate DSR BA Controller is to carry on his person at g47 all times a 2-person Attack BA Control Board as shown at Fig 27-5. and a marker pen. The g47 Board is to be partially marked-up with nominated names and the initial BA pressure, entered g47 in column B, which is to be 160 bar. On hear ing the emergency broadcast, the time of the initial g47 Fire pipe is to be entered in column C as the time started to breathe. Columns D, E and F g47 should then be completed as per the instructions on the board. Note that this Board is only to be g47 used for the first on air entry made by the nominat ed Attack BA firefighters in the Scene of the g47 Incident. For further information on the du ties of the DSRBA Controller see Para 2047. g47 g47g47 A g47 B g47 C g47 D g47 E g47 F g47 SET g47 No. g47OPERATORS g47 NAME g47TASK g47 CYLINDER g47 PRESSURE g47 bar g47TIME STARTED g47 TO BREATHER g47 Pipe time g47TIME RELIEF g47 DUE IN g47 C 17 mins g47TIME RETURN g47 COMMENCES g47 D 7 mins g47TIME DUE g47 OUT g47 E 12 mins g47 g47g47 FF g47 160 g47g47g47g47g47 g47g47 FF g47 160 g47g47g47g47g47 g47 Fig 27-5. MMPP 2 - Person Attack BA Control Board for EDBA g47 g47 2715. BA Tote Board g47 The BA Coordinators Tote Board is illustrated at Fig 27-6. It is used by the BA g47 Coordinator to keep a running record of the lo cation and state of all BA sets and spare air g47 cylinders available for DCFF. g47 2716-2739. Spare. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-11 Change 1 Fig 27-6. BA Coordinators Tote Board not to size g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-12 UK RESTRICTED SECTION 2 - EMERGENCY LIFE SUPPORT APPARATUS g47 2740. Purpose and Function The Emergency Life Support Apparatus ELS A is a short duration compressed air breathing set which provides a lightweight, easily operated system of resp iratory protection for the wearer during emergency escape from an area of toxic, or smoke-filled, atmosphere. Theapparatus is not suitable for heavy use such as fi refighting, rescue or repair work as the air supplied from a fully charged cylinder lasts approximately eight minutes from the time thecontrol valve is opened. 2741. Description The set, which is fully de scribed in BR 8414, comprises a. A yellow coloured carrying bag, complete with sling except for MCMVs which are supplied with a fluorescent green bag to indicate that it contains an aluminiumcylinder. b. A compressed air cylinder, complete with control valvereducergauge assembly.c. A transparent plastic hood with elasticated neckband which fits over the wearers head. The hood is connected to the valve assembly by a flexible supply tube, with aswivel connection at the hood end. Fig 27-7. Emergency Life Support Apparatus ELSA g47 2742. Operating Instructions To use an ELSA, proceed as follows a. Remove the ELSA from the stowage.b. Place the carrying strap around the neck, with the carrying case on the chest.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-13 Change 1c. Secure the carrying case to the body, using the harness. d. Open the control valve until the valve wheel spins free.e. Place the hood over the head, so that the elasticated neck is secured around the wearers neck. f. Ensure that the supply hose is to the front and clean air is being delivered to the wearer the hood will flood with air. g. Vacate the compartment. 2743. The hood does not have an exhaust port, so the level of carbon dioxide inside it will build up as the wearer breathes out. This may cause the wearer to feel breathless or dizzy. If thishappens, the wearer should a. Place his fingers under the elasticated neck and pull it away from his own neck. b. Collapse the hood around his head to force out the carbon dioxide.c. Release the elas ticated neck, allowing the hood to fill with clean air. d. Loss of vision, caused by condensation, can be corrected by rubbing the insides of the hood together when carrying out the above procedure. 2744. In situations where a chemi cal threat has necessitated pr ior donning of NBC respirators, escape from a smoke filled environment can be affected by holding the neck seal of the ELSAhood over the respirator canister. This avoids the hazard and delay in doffing and donning both equipments. 2745. Maintenance Shipboard maintenance is limited to visual examination, minor replacements and any necessary re-charging of the compressed air cyli nder to ensure the pressure, when stowed, is between 180 and 200 bar. The maximum working pressure, 200 bar, is not to be exceeded.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 27-14 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-1 Change 1CHAPTER 28 PUMPING, DRAINING AND BALLASTING CONTENTS Para D r a i n a g e A r r a n g e m e n t s ............................................... 2802 B a l l a s t i n g A r r a n g e m e n t s .............................................. 2804 S u c t i o n L i f t a n d D i s c h a r g e H e a d ........................................ 2806 P u m p P e r f o r m a n c e................................................... 2807 P o r t a b l e a n d M o b i l e P u m p s............................................ 2808 P u m p A l l o w a n c e s ................................................... 2809 F i r e f i g h t i n g P u m p s................................................... 2810 M o b i l e P u m p ....................................................... 2811 P o r t a b l e D i e s e l P u m p................................................. 2812 P o r t a b l e S u b m e r s i b l e P u m p s ........................................... 2814 E d u c t o r s ........................................................... 2815 Pump Sea Suction Standpipes .......................................... 2816 Compartment Standpipes .............................................. 2817 O v e r b o a r d D i s c h a r g e C o n n e c t i o n s ...................................... 2818 E l e c t r i c S u b m e r s i b l e P u m p P o w e r S o c k e t s ................................ 2819 P u m p S t o w a g e s ..................................................... 2821 N A T O S t a n d a r d F l a n g e A d a p t o r s ....................................... 2822 ANNEXES Annex A Weda Electrical Submersible Pump Annex B Godiva GN 1700 Diesel Driven Emergency Fire Pump Annex C Godiva GN 500 Diesel Driven Emergency Fire Pump Annex D Desmi S100 LDW 2004 Diesel Driven Emergency Fire Pump g47 Annex E ARO Air Driven Pump Annex F Rover Gas Turbine Driven Emergency Fire PumpBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-3 Change 1CHAPTER 28 PUMPING, DRAINING AND BALLASTING 2801. Pumping, draining and ballasting arrangemen ts are provided in ships for the following main purposes a. To pressurize the HP sea water system for firefighting, domestic use, etc, and to provide water via the LP sea water system for machinery cooling, etc. b. To remove water that has been let into the ship either deliberately or as a result of damage or firefighting. c. To introduce sea water into specified co mpartments to correct adverse heel andor trim. d. To introduce sea water into specified compartments or into fuel displacement systems to maintain stability. This chapter deals with the emergency arrangements provided for pressurizing the HP sea water g47 system for firefighting purposes, with the equi pment for removing water, eg by pumping, educting or draining, and that for ballasting to control heel andor trim and to maintain stability.The Annexes to this chapter give brief details of portable and mobile pumps, used for damage control and firefighting. 2802. Drainage Arrangements Weather decks and tops of superstructures ar e fitted with scuppers to drain loose water overboard. Pipes from the scuppers are led directly to ships side outlets and are not usually fitted with storm valves simple flap valves. Drains from internal compartments are either ledto drain tanks or sumps, or directly overboard. If the latter, they are fitted with storm valveswhich can be shut. Shutting the storm valve prev ents flooding back into the compartment if the ship heels or trims after damage. Storm valves are usually operated from a higher deck through rod gearing. Drain tanks and sumps are pumped out by fixed or portable pumps or eductors. Scuppers and drains are not to be interconnect ed because of the risk of spreading flooding between compartments and of spreading contamination if prewetting is being operated in an NBCenvironment. In ships with pressurized citadels, all drains serving compartments inside thecitadel must be fitted with 150mm U water seals. 2803. In newer ships T23 and later screwed plugs are fitted in some decks to allow excessive g47 water, due to firefighting, to be drained down to lower compartments which are fitted with fixedeductors. 2804. Ballasting Arrangements The method used to fill a compartment with sea water is through fixed or portable connections from the HP sea water system to the designated compartments for eitherBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-4 UK RESTRICTED a. Fuel compensationdisplacement to maintain ship stability. b. Ballast tanks to compensate for consumed stores.c. To improve the ships attitude after collision or action damage. In assault ships, a number of ba llast tanks are fitted for flooding and pumping to enable the ship to be used as a floating dock. The consider ations which govern counterflooding action are referred to in Chapter 15. 2805. Spare. 2806. Suction Lift and Discharge Head Suction lift refers to the ability of a pump to lift water from below. In the ideal situation, with a perfect vacuum, water can be raised 10m. In practice the pumps used in the Service willlift water through two decks except for the Godiva GN 500 Pump, which will lift through one deck only. If the lift required is more than 5-6m then a submersible pump must be selected. The head to which a pump will discharge depends on the pump discharge capacity. 2807. Pump Performance The capacity of a centrifugal pump is related to total head which is the suction lift plus the discharge head see Fig 28-1. Pumping capacity is affected by system head losses due tofittings in the pipework such as valves, bends etc, friction in the associated pipework and thedifference in height between the suction point a nd the discharge point. Thus, when rigging a pump the shorter the suction hose, and hence su ction lift, the better the pump performance for firefighting and pumping out see Annexes for pump capacities. Fig 28-1. Pump HeadUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-5 Change 12808. Portable and Mobile Pumps These pumps are defined by as follows g47 a.Portable Pump. A pump which can easily and quickly be moved without mechanical aids, between compartments a nd decks of a ship, and not having an appreciably greater weight than 100kg. b.Mobile Pump. A pump which can be moved be tween compartments and decks of a ship and not falling within the definition of a portable pump. 2809. Pump Allowances The allowance, for RN surface ships and RFAs, of pumps and eductors detailed in BR 21703, is based on the following criteria a.Firefighting 1 Multiple NBCD Section Ships. Four 100m3hr installed emergency diesel driven pumps are to be sited in the ship e xcept the hangar section. In addition four portable diesel driven pumps per ship are to be provided. 2 Single NBCD Section Ships. Two 100m3hr installed emergency diesel gas turbine driven pumps, to be sited one forw ard and one aft. In addition, two portable diesel driven pumps per ship are to be provided for flexibility in firefighting. 3 Minor War Vessels. One GN 500 emergency porta ble diesel driven pump per vessel. b.Damage Control 1 Ships with 3 or more FRPPs. Two submersible high capacity portable electric driven pumps are to be sited at or in the vicinity of each Fire and Repair Party Post. 2 FrigatesDestroyers with 2 FRPPs. Three submersible high capacity portable electric driven pumps are to be sited at each Fire and Repair Party Post. 3 Minor War Vessels. One or two high capacity electric driven pumps per vessel. Small vessels be low 1000 tonnes may be fitted with one medium capacity electric driven pump. Where vessels are considered too small or are limited by theirelectrical supplies they are to utilize the portable diesel driven pump s upplied for firefighting. 2810. Firefighting Pumps Mobile and portable, indepe ndently driven, diesel pum ps Godiva GN 1700 and Desmi S100 LDW 2004 are provided for firefighting du ties when normal HPSW main and electrical g47 power supplies are damaged or destroyed. Th e Godiva GN 500 pump should never be connected to the HPSW main and should always be used independently. These pumps will also provide emergency standby firefighting capability for ships in dock, or alongside when ships generating capacity is not available and shore facilities are limited. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-6 UK RESTRICTED2811. Mobile Pump The mobile diesel pump is to be semi-permanently installed in its working position adjacent, and connected by the portable hoses, to a sea suction standpipe and also the exhaust outlet. The two pump discharges are to be c onnected by two No 3 delivery hoses to the HPSW system via two hydrants sited in close proximity to the pump position, and two double male instantaneous coupling adaptors provided for this purpose. Note. The mobile diesel pump is too heavy fo r normal mobility, as defined in Para 2808b. In ships where a common working and storage positi on cannot be achieved a mobile gas turbine pump is provided. 2812. Portable Diesel Pump This pump is to be stowed in a read ily accessible and sheltered position off the weatherdeck complete with suc tion, delivery and exhaust accessories. It may also be used for pumping out and for the assistance of other ships or services in distress. 2813. When diesel pumps are used outside the ship or inside for pumping out free water, the suction hoses are to be fitted with a suction stra iner at the free end. When used inside the ship for firefighting, the suction hose is to be coupled to a sea suction standpipe and flexible exhaust hoses maximum 4 3m lengths are to be provi ded to carry the exhaust fumes to the open air through doors, hatches or the special exhaus t outlets provided in the ships structure. 2814. Portable Submersible Pumps Portable, electrically-driven, submersible pum ps are provided for damage control duties. They are normally classified as drainage pum ps rather than salvage pumps in order to g47 differentiate between the DC pumps used on wa rships for pumping out and the pumps used by specialized ships for salvage operations. The submersible electrically-driven pumps areprovided, primarily, for DC duties but they can al so, if needed, be used for firefighting subject to their limitations and the availability of electri cal power. See Annex 28A for series connection of Weda pumps for firefighting. 2815. Eductors There are two types of eductor, both using HPSW flow through a venturi to create a suction a.Fixed Eductors. These are fitted in machiner y spaces, cable lockers and other compartments, low down in the ship, with a high probability of water ingress. b.Portable Eductors. These are normally stowed at FRPP lockers and can quickly be rigged and supplied by hose from the HPSW main. They are supplied with non- collapsible suction hoses, clamps and a strain er. The discharge is led, by a No 3 hose, to an overboard discharge c onnection or to the upper deck.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-7 Change 1 Fig 28-2. Portable Eductor 2816. Pump Sea Suction Standpipes These are 108mm nominal size and are pr ovided for use with the diesel-driven firefighting pumps. They are fitted one per Fire Zone which is to include any required for fixedindependent pumps. The verti cal lift demanded by the sea su ction standpipes should not exceed 5m. Sea suction standpipes terminate within the ship approximately 150mm above deck level with a 100mm nominal size male-screwed connecti on to BS 336. A watertig ht, lockable, female- screwed cap is fitted to each standpipe. Each s ea suction standpipe is f itted with a suction elbow piece which is fitted with a 100mm nominal size fe male-screwed swivel connector with locking ring on the base which connects with the sea su ction standpipe. The fr ee end is fitted with a 100mm nominal size male, ribbed, tail e nd for connecting to the suction hose. 2817. Compartment Standpipes These are only provided in spaces normally closed in action and into which it is not practicable to introduce a suction hose or s ubmersible pump, eg where entry is by a door. Compartment standpipes cons ist of a short, vertical, length of 76.1mm nominal size piping fitted with a strainer at the lower end and terminating outside the compartment in a 75mm nominal sizemale ribbed tail connector to BS 336, which is fitted with a lock able watertight female-screwed cap. This is to enable the suction hose to be connected direct onto the standpipe with the aid of a 75mm nominal size hose clamp. These compar tments are fitted with sounding arrangements. 2818. Overboard Discharge Connections Overboard discharges are provided for us e with portable pumps, in conjunction with collecting head adaptors, twin female instantaneous connections to enable a single or twin runof discharge hoses to be connected from a pump. Overboard discharges are fitted at readilyaccessible positions to a minimum of one in each watertight section along the lowest communication deck, and sited altern ately on port and starboard sides of the ship. In larger ships, or where access is not available across the ship, tw o discharges are fitted in each watertight sub- division, one port and one starboar d. Where discharges are sited in an enclosed compartment a tally plate worded PORTABLE PUMP OVERBOARD DISCHARGE INSIDECOMPARTMENT in black letters on a white back ground is to be sited adjacent to the door of the compartment, and not obscured by it when it is open.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-8 UK RESTRICTED2819. Electric Submersible Pump Power Sockets Power sockets for portable pumps are sited on, or near, the centre line of the ship on the lowest communicating deck, on the basis of one in each main WT sub-division in DDFF andtwo in each main WT sub-division in larger ships see Chapter 19 for details. g47 2820. Spare. g47 2821. Pump Stowages Stowages for portable pumps and their accessories are sited on the lowest communication deck adjacent to the FRPP lockers. Covers are provided for pumps which are not stowed within a locker. Securing arrangements are provided for all pumps. 2822. NATO Standard Flange Adaptors A range of adaptors, specified in Stanag 1169, is carried by NATO ships to facilitate interchangeability of dama ge control and firefighting hose connections. This allows for the transfer of independently driven portable pumps between ships of different nations. One end of each adaptor has the appropriate national connection, but the co mmon features are the standard NATO flanges at the other end a.NATO Standard Delivery Flange. 6.5in outside diameter , 2.5in inside diameter, 6 holes at 5.25in pitch circle diameter. b.NATO Standard Suction Flange. 7.5in outside diameter , 3.5in inside diameter, 6 holes at 6.25in pitch circle diameter. 2823. The allowances of the following adaptors, detailed in BR 21703, are to be stowed in selected FRPP lockers a. NATO standard suction flange to 4.5in OD unified female thread. See Fig 28-3. b. NATO standard suction flange to 4.5in OD unified male thread. See Fig 28-4. c. NATO standard delivery flange to 2.5in male instanta neous connection. See Fig 28-5.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-9 Original d. NATO standard delivery flange to 2.5in female instan taneous connection. See Fig 28-6. e. NATO standard delivery flange to 7in inte rnational shore connection flange. This is referred to as a distance piece, because it is inserted between the NATO flange and theinternational flange See Fig 28-7. Fig 28-3. NATO Suction Flange F ig 28-4. NATO Suction Flange 4.5in Female Thread Adaptor 4.5in Male Thread Adaptor Fig 28-5. NATO Delivery Flange Fig 28-6. NATO Delivery Flange Male Instantaneous Adaptor F emale Instanta neous Adaptor Fig 28-7. NATO DeliveryInternational Shore Flange Distance PieceBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28-10 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28A-1 Change 3 ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 28 WEDA ELECTRICAL SUBMERSIBLE PUMP 1. Description The Weda, electrically driven, portable pump ope rates submerged in the water to be pumped. This pump is provided primarily for pumping ou t loose water. When two pumps are used in tandem or series they provide a very useful em ergency firefighting system. In the latter case suction can be taken from overside or fro m a flooded compartmenttank onboard. The pump must be lifted or lowered using the handle with rope attached, and not by the electrical cable. The cable is to be whipped to the lowering r ope at 450 mm intervals. When using a Weda pump g45 during a flooding incident, consideration shoul d be given to leaving the pump unsecured. If g45 secured, the likelihood of being unable to retr ieve the pump should the situation in the g45 compartment deteriorate should be weighed up against the safety of personnel, especially if the g45 ship is in State 1 and further action damage c ould occur. When the ship is conducting training g45 the WEDA pump may be lashed in position for safe operation. g45 Fig 28A-1. Weda Electric Submersible Pump 2. Pumping Out When used for pumping out loose water, the Weda pump is to be fitted with the twin discharge piece, which has two fema le instantaneous couplings. One size 3 hose is sufficient for the pump discharge. If only one hose is used, the unused connection on the twin discharge piece must have a blanking plug fitted. Alternatively, two hoses may be used. 3. Emergency Firefighting Two Weda pumps, connected in series, can be us ed in the firefighting mode. The first pump which is taking suction is f itted with a 4in discharge adaptor as supplied and a 4in discharge hose to the second pump which has the series c oupling conversion kit on its suction side. The second pump is fitted with a twin discharge piece, supplying two hoses for firefighting. A total of four hoses may be supplied, by fitting Y pieces, but only in extreme emergency due to the reliance on a single source.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28A-2 UK RESTRICTED Fig 28A-2. Weda Pumps in Series 4. Pump Accessories A switched emergency rat tail connector. A 10m length of 4in discharge hose. A twin 2in instantaneous female discharge piece. Two 4in hose connectors. One series coupling conversion kit per two pumps. One electrical adapto r lead per pump. Type A - pre T23, Type B - T23 and later. A trolley and stowage kit, including an exte nded handle, a trolley and a stowage bracket.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28A-3 Change 15. Pump Particulars Weight dry 59kg Performance 100m3hr at 1.8 bar Size See Fig 43A-1Power supplies 440 V 3-phase 60 Hz full load 13.5 amps 6. Handbook Full details are published in BRF 6570662. g45 g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45 Fig 28A-3. Weda Pump Trolley g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28A-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28B-1 OriginalANNEX B TO CHAPTER 28 GODIVA GN 1700 DIESEL DRIVEN EMERGENCY FIRE PUMP 1. Description The Godiva GN 1700, diesel driven, emergency fi re pump is classified as a mobile pump but it is also used as a static pump with a dedi cated sea suction and a riser to the HPSW main. 2. Operating Instructions The pump should be run for at least one hour pe r week, either to supply the HPSW main or to discharge overboard. Flushing out is not nece ssary. The pump must not be left to run against a closed discharge or against an already pressurised HPSW main as the engine will overheat dueto lack of secondary c ooling water circulation. 3. Pump Particulars Weight dry - ex fuel tanks 272kg Fuel diesel F76 2 28.5 litre portable tanksPerformance 100m 3hr at 7.3 bar Size See Fig 43B-1. 4. Handbook Full details are published in BR 6570621.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28B-2 UK RESTRICTED Fig 28B-1. Godiva GN 1700 Diesel Firefighting Pump Front Fig 28B-2. Godiva GN 1700 Diesel Firefighting Pump RearUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28C-1 Change 1 ANNEX C TO CHAPTER 28 GODIVA GN 500 DIESEL DRIVEN EMERGENCY FIRE PUMP 1. Description The Godiva GN 500 previously known as Hathaw ay HMD7 diesel dr iven emergency fire pump is classified as a portable pump. It has th e capacity to supply two hoses in a waterwall and firefighter combination. It is two-man-portable and can be w heelbarrowed by one person. It can be passed through a 610mm square hatchway. 2. Operating Instructions The pump should be run once-weekly for an hour using suction hoses over the quarter-deck or from suction standpipe, utilizing the adaptor incl uded with the accessories. The static suction lift is 3.5m one deck high and lifts greater th an this will cause the pump performance to fall off rapidly. Although primarily a sm all firefighting pump it can also be used for pumping out loose flood water. Ideally this pump should be stow ed in a dry stowage close to the upper deck. 3. Pump Particulars Weight dry 113kg Fuel diesel F76 5.1 litre tankPerformance 33m 3hr at 2.75 bar Size See Fig 28C-1. g45 Fig 28C-1. Godiva GN 500, Diesel-Driven, Portable Firefighting PumpBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28C-2 UK RESTRICTED4. Pump Accessories g45 The following accessories are to be held with each pump g45 g45 a. 3 suction hoses. g45 g45 b. 2 coupling hose joint sleeves. g45 g45 c. 2 exhaust hoses. g45 g45 d. 1 suction strainer. g45 g45 e. 6 hose clamps. g45 g45 f. 1 suction blanking cap. g45 g45 g. 1 protective cover. g45 g45 5. Handbook g45 Full details are published in BRF 6570620. g45UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28D-1 Change 1 ANNEX D TO CHAPTER 28 DESMI S100 LDW 2004 DIESEL DRIVEN EMERGENCY FIRE PUMP g45 1. Description The Desmi diesel driven, mobile pump is the successor to the Godiva GN 1700 pump, but is only supplied to ships not already supplied with the latter. 2. Operating Instructions The pump should be run continuously for at l east one hour per week, either to prime the g45 HPSW main or to discharge ove rboard. Flushing out is not necessary. The unit should not be g45 left to pump against an already fully pressurised HPSW main, as the engine exhaust will overheat g45 due to the lack of secondary cooling water circul ation. When the fuel tanks have been removed g45 for refuelling, the self-sealing couplings mu st be pushed fully home to prevent leakage. g45 Fig 28D-1. Desmi S100 LDW 2004 Diesel Fire Pump g45 3. Pump Particulars Weight dry 375kg g45 Fuel diesel F76 Two 25 litre containersPerformance 100m 3hr at 7 bar, at 3.5m suction lift g45 Size 1325mm x 513mm x 1200mm. g45 4. Handbook Full details are published in BRF 6570629.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28D-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28E-1 Change 1 ANNEX E TO CHAPTER 28 ARO AIR DRIVEN PUMP 1. Description The ARO previously known as Sanseal air driven portable pump is a general purpose pump which can be used for pumping fl ammable liquids. Its secondary role is as an emergency bilge pump. 2. Operating Instructions The pump is self-priming and may be allowed to run dry for short periods, but it will suffer ball valve erosion if this beco mes excessive. The power source is the ships LP air main. Fig 28E-1. ARO Air Driven Pump 3. Pump Particulars Weight dry 50kg Power source LP air at 7 barPerformance 12m 3hr with air at 4.8 bar 15m3hr with air at 7 bar Size 502mm x 333mm x 292mm g45 4. Handbook Full details are published in BRF 6570807.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28E-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28F-1 Original ANNEX F TO CHAPTER 28 ROVER GAS TURBINE DRIVEN EMERGENCY FIRE PUMP 1. Description The Rover sometimes referred to as Miles or Hunting Hi-volt gas turbine driven emergency pump is classified as a mobile pump. It is provided primarily to gi ven an onboard emergency firefighting capability but it can also be used fo r pumping out loose flood water and for assisting other ships. It provides emergency standby fi refighting capability for ships in dry dock or for ships alongside when electrical generators are closed down and the shore electrical supply is limited. It does not supply sufficient water for the protection of magazines when explosive stores are onboard. Where practicable, it has been replaced in ships by the Godiva GN 1700 pump. 2. Suction Hoses The pump suction hoses have camlock couplings see Fig 28F-2. The pump should be fitted with a flangedcamlock suction adaptor. The suction strainer, which has a threaded coupling,must be connected via a male th readcamlock adaptor. These items are detailed in BR 21703. Fig 28F-1. Rover Gas Turbine Portable Pump 3. Operating Instructions The pump should be run for at least one hour per week, after which it must be washed out with fresh water to prevent corrosion and seizure. 4. Pump Particulars Weight dry 134kg Fuel diesel F76 Two 25 litre containersPerformance 120m 3hr at 6.3 bar, at zero suction lift Size See Fig 28F-1.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 28F-2 UK RESTRICTED 5. Handbook Full details are published in BRF 6570609. Fig 28F-2. Camlock Hose CouplingUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-1 OriginalCHAPTER 29 SHIP STRUCTURE AND FITTINGS CONTENTS Para S t r e s s e s I n S e r v i c e ................................................... 2902 N B C D D e s i g n A s p e c t s................................................ 2903 Z o n i n g ............................................................ 2904 Subdivision ........................................................ 2905 O p e n i n g s .......................................................... 2907 A c c e s s O p e n i n g s .................................................... 2909 C a r e o f W T C l o s u r e s ................................................. 2910 A c c e s s L a d d e r s ..................................................... 2912 E m e r g e n c y E s c a p e L a d d e r s ............................................ 2913 C o n t r o l o f O p e n i n g s.................................................. 2914 A i r E s c a p e s ........................................................ 2915 S t r u c t u r a l I n t e g r i t y ................................................... 2916 P r e s e r v a t i o n o f S t r u c t u r e .............................................. 2917 S t r u c t u r a l P r o t e c t i o n ................................................. 2918 F i r e B a r r i e r I n s u l a t i o n ................................................ 2919 C l a s s i f i c a t i o n o f F i r e B a r r i e r s .......................................... 2920BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-3 Change 3 CHAPTER 29 SHIP STRUCTURE AND FITTINGS 2901. The greater part of a warships structure is steel plating, welded and held to shape by steel frames, beams and longitudinals. The structure is designed to provide a. Strength to withstand all the forces acting on the ship under all conditions of service. b. Buoyancy and stability.c. Space, protection and accommodation for machinery, stores, equipment and personnel. d. Habitability under all conditions of service. 2902. Stresses In Service The most important stresses met in service by warships are a.Longitudinal. Stresses in the fore and aft line are caused by the variation in the buoyant forces acting on the ship as a result of the wave action along its length. These cause conditions known as hogging and sa gging see Fig 29-1. The greatest stresses occur in the topmost continuous deck usually 1 Deck, the vertical and flat keels and the adjoining strakes of plating garboard strakes together with the topmost strakes ofshipside plating sheer strake. The bendi ng stresses are usually greatest in the middle of the ships length. Fig 29-1. Hogging and Sagging b.Racking. Heavy rolling causes stresses which tend to alter the transverse shape of the ship Fig 29-2 and are resisted by the main transverse bulkheads and framing.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-4 UK RESTRICTED Fig 29-2. Racking c.Local. Local stresses are imposed by heav y weights eg machinery, weapons, etc, by propeller thrust, the firing of weapons, th e landing and movement of aircraft, berthing and docking. All these stresses are accentuated if the ship is structurally damaged or subject to shock or whip see Chapter 14. 2903. NBCD Design Aspects There are many features of NBCD which influence, or are influenced by, ship design and layout. Among the more important are a. Watertight, and gastight, s ubdivision, openings and fittings. b. Structural protection a nd the thickness of plating. c. Dispersal, siting and layout of equipm ent, systems and power supplies, and the arrangements for isolation, dupli cation, and resistance to shock. d. Ventilation, air-conditioning and air-filtration systems. e. Nuclear hardening of certain electrical systems.f. Chemical hardening of expos ed structure and equipment. g47UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-5 Change 3 Fig 29-3. Section of a Typical All-welded FrigateBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-6 UK RESTRICTED2904. Zoning Certain RN ships and RFAs incorporate an NB CD zoning system. The principles of this system are a. Zone end boundaries are coincident with main watertight bulkheads to No 1 Deck and continued up through the superstr ucture as fire barrier bulkheads. b. The combined length of any two adjacent zones is not less than 30 nor more than 50 of the waterline length. c. If a fire extends over two adjacent zones then essential services firefighting, sea water, fresh water, chilled water, salvage, electrical power generation and distributionare maintained in the remaining zones. d. Each zone has its own NBC filter units AFUs and ventilationair conditioning systems any emergency cross connections have closures operable from both sides and are normally to remain shut. Smoke clearance arrangements are provided in each zone,crash stopping of fans AFUs and ATUs ar e on a zone basis with restart of AFUs similarly based. e. Each zone has at least one HPSW pump and the HPSW main has remotely operable isolating valves at zone boundaries. f. Sufficient domestic facilities are provided in each zone for it to be occupied for prolonged periods in high NBCD states. 2905. Subdivision Subdivision can be either wate rtight, gastight or non-wate rtight, as required by the design. Watertight subdivision makes the greatest c ontribution to the strength of the ship. It is also gastight, though gastight structure is not necessarily watertight. Watertight subdivision localises flooding and usually fire, preserve s buoyancy and provides protection for equipment and personnel. Gastight subdivision is designed to prevent the entry and dispersion of NBC agents. The amount of subdivision is limited by various conflicting re quirements, such as a. Habitability.b. Economy in weight.c. Ease of supply of weapons to their firing points, stowage of fuel and stores, ease of movement. d. The piercing of structure by pipe, electrical and ventilation systems.e. The size of equipment to be installed, and the need for adequate space for equipment and machinery removal routes.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-7 Change 12906. Subdivision is achieved by the following structures a.Deck and Flats. These watertight structures divide the ship in the vertical direction a flat being a short non-continuous length of deck. Weather decks are built with camber and sheer to assist in the drainage of water. The position of the lowestcontinuous deck in a ship is usually governed by the height of the machinery spaces. b.Main Transverse Bulkheads. These are strong, watertight, structures which continue as high up in the ship as possible. They divide the ship lengthwise into anumber of main watertight sections. The foremost bulkhead extends from the keel tothe weather deck in smaller ships, and to a suitable deck well above the waterline in larger ships, and is called the collision bulkhead. c.Main Longitudinal Bulkheads. In DDFF and smaller ships these fore and aft, watertight bulkheads are kept to the minimum possible to reduce the risk of flooding on one side only of the ship. Larger ships ha ve longitudinal bulkheads as detailed by the design requirements, eg where local longitudi nal strength is require d or where additional protection is needed for magazines etc. d.Hull and Inner Bottom. The part of the hull below the waterline is called the outer bottom. In some large ships an inner bottom is constructed which extends, normally,over an area covered by the machinery spaces and up the ships side abreast of them.Where an inner bottom is fitted the space be tween it and the outer bottom is called the double bottom, and this is divided up into suitably-sized compartments by welded g47 transverse and longitudinal framing. e.Minor Bulkheads. These are fitted between decks, usually fore and aft, as required to subdivide the main sections and so provide compartmentation for accommodation, stores, passageways, offices, workshops, etc. These bulkheads may be watertight or non-watertight as requi red by the design. Fig 29-4 shows typical arrangements of subdivision in HM ships.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-8 UK RESTRICTED Fig 29-4. Profile and Sections of Large WarshipUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-9 Change 32907. Openings Structure must be pierced to allow access to compartments, movement through the ship and passage for ventilation tr unking, pipe systems, contro l systems and electric cables. Watertight and gastig ht integrity depend on a. The design of the openings, which must include arrangements for making them watertight or gastight. b. Maintenance of openings and the preservation of structure and fittings.c. Control of openings, as required by the wa tertight andor gas tight condition set for the ship. 2908. In the design of a ship, the piercing of wa tertight and gastight structure is rigidly controlled, especially in the Red Risk Zone where immediate flooding is likely after underwater damage see Chapter 5. Within this zone main bulkheads are not usually pierced for access, andtrunks are built through decks so that access may be gained to most of the lower compartments. Where ventilation and other systems must pierce main watertight bulkheads these are takenthrough, wherever possible, above the Red Risk Zone . Wherever watertight or gastight structure is pierced, provision for maintaining integrity is made by fitting a. Watertight or gastight doors, hatche s, manholes, escape scuttles, fixed windows and side lights. b. Watertight slide valves, closures and gas-flaps in ventilation systems.c. Watertight glands to rod gearing, electri c cables, propeller shaf ts and rudder stocks. d. Bulkhead pieces and stop valves in pipe systems near decks and main bulkheads. 2909. Access Openings Access openings are in two categories a. Those in general or occasional routine use, eg watertight doors, hatches and manholes, the opening of which are governed by control markings or a special routine or order see Chapter 5. b. Those normally kept closed, eg bolted manhole-covers to ta nks and double-bottom compartments and emergency escape exits. 2910. Care of WT Closures The proper handling of closures to openings he lps to maintain safety and efficiency and reduces the maintenance workload. Much usef ul information is contained in BR 2203 - Ship Husbandry Manual. The follo wing points are important a. Hatch and ma nhole covers should never be dropped, but should be lowered, onto their seatings.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-10 UK RESTRICTEDb. Clips on doors must be engaged from a bove downwards onto the door wedges to make sure that they are not sh aken off by vibration or shock. c. Clips should be tightened in diagona lly-opposite pairs usin g only strong hand pressure. Hammers must neve r be used for this purpose. If a door, hatch or manhole should be slightly distorted and cannot be made to seat firmly, or to open, by hand pressure on the clips, a tubular steel sams on normally stowed adjacent to watertight doors on main watertight bulkhead s should be used to apply the extra leverage required. d. When gear is being handled through doors and hatches care must be taken to avoid damaging sills, coamings a nd rubber sealing strips gas kets and their fastenings. e. The rubber gaskets in watertight or gastight doors, hatches, manholes, escape scuttles, flaps and covers must never be painted as it will cau se the rubber to deteriorate, and degrade the integrity of the closure. 2911. Some hatches are fitte d with manholes to give access wit hout the need to open the hatch. Such manholes have covers whic h can be operated from above and below. Manholes in hatches must not be confused with bolted manholes see Chapter 3. 2912. Access Ladders Sloping steel ladders give access to spaces approached by a hatch and in constant use eg accommodation spaces, workshops, stores etc. Slopi ng ladders, with hatc hes beneath them, are constructed such that they can be broken and hinged back so that they hang down, clear of the hatch below. 2913. Emergency Escape Ladders Emergency escape ladders flexible are fitted where permanent steel ladders are not g47 fitted. They are attached to eyeplates at th eir upper and lower ends. Emergency escape ladders g47 are to be in position and rigged, in all states of readiness, except for those which would impede progress through the ship which, in State 3 only, ar e to be rolled up and stowed. All ladders are to be rigged in an emergency, or individually when required for use. When ladders are stowed they are to be secured by 5mm polyester line and held by a slip knot. 2914. Control of Openings However efficient the design and mainte nance of openings and their closures, watertightness and gastightness ultimately depends on the strict control over all openings whichpose the risk of spread of floodwater or the entry of NBC agents. The organisation for this control is given in Chapter 5.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-11 Change 12915. Air Escapes Air escape pipes rise from the crowns of a ll compartments which contain liquids or are fitted with flooding arrangements those fro m adjoining compartments are sometimes grouped together. Air escapes must terminate outside the Red Risk Zone and those from magazines and compartments containing flammables must be fitted with wire ga uze filters as a fire precaution. Care must be taken in maintenance to ensure th at the perforations at the outboard ends of air escapes are not obstructed, for instance, by pain t. As an NBC precaution, air escapes to fresh- water systems and magazines are sited within the citadel. Magazine air escapes have automaticvalves which open only when the amount of flood or spray water in the compartment is enough to cause a predetermined increase in pressure. 2916. Structural Integrity Watertightness and gastight ness can be impaired by a. Corrosion.b. Perished, worn, or painted r ubbers on closures to openings. c. Distorted closures to openings.d. Defective glands to rod gearing, electric cables and pipes.e. Unblanked holes such as redundant cab le glands, screw and bolt holes etc. 2917. Preservation of Structure The strength, watertightness and gastightness of a ship can be seriously impaired if corrosion is not prevented in its structure. BR 2203 - Ship Husbandry Manual gives detailed information on this subject. However the following points should be borne in mind a. Accumulation of water should be prevente d, especially where different metals are in contact in the water. Heat accentuates any adverse reaction caused by theseconditions. b. Any liquid flowing from copper pipes must be run clear of aluminium structure and fittings. c. Strong alkalis, such as caustic soda, must not be used for cleaning structural materials, particularly aluminium. 2918. Structural Protection The protection afforded by structure depe nds upon the thickness and composition of the plating. Much of the protection required for equipment is gained by siting it below the waterline,below the superstructure and, in larger ships, behind longitudinal bulkheads. This also applies to the protection of personnel fro m blast and radiation hazards.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 29-12 UK RESTRICTED2919. Fire Barrier Insulation Bulkheads and decks forming the boundaries of high risk compartments in some ships have a layer of fire barrier insu lation applied to them. Care must be taken to preserve the fire g47 barrier properties of these bounda ries throughout the life of a ship. Any insulation which is g47 removed or damaged during ref it work, etc, must be rein stated as soon as possible. g47 2920. Classification of Fire Barriers In RFAs and other vessels built to comply with Safety of Life at Sea SOLAS and Maritime and Coastguard Agency MCA requirements, the following definitions are used g47 a.Class A Divisions. These are bulkheads and decks made of steel or equivalent material capable of preventing the passage of smoke and flame to the end of the 60minute standard fire test. Insulated with an approved non-combustible material, theaverage temperature on the unexposed surface of the panel will not rise more than 139C above the original temperature, nor will the temperature at any one point, including any joint, rise more than 180C above the original temperature within the time interval. The divisions are classed to indicate this inte rval, eg an A-60 bulkhead will not exceed the stated temperature rise in 60 minutes. b.Class B Divisions. These need not be made of steel but must be of non- combustible material and must prevent the pa ssage of smoke and flame to the end of the first 30 minutes of the standard fire test. They are insulated such that the averagetemperature of the unexposed side will not rise more than 139C above the original temperature, nor will the temperature at any one point, including any joint, rise morethan 225C above the original temperature w ithin the time interval. The divisions are classed to indicate this interval, eg a B-15 bulkhead will not exceed the statedtemperature rise in 15 minutes. c.Class C Divisions. These are of non-combustible material. They meet neither requirements for the passage of smoke and flame nor limitations to the temperature rise.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-1 OriginalCHAPTER 30 BASIC SHIP STABILITY CONTENTS Para Stability Knowledge Requirements ...................................... 3001 F l o t a t i o n ........................................................... 3004 Displacement ....................................................... 3005 B u o y a n t V o l u m e .................................................... 3007 C e n t r e o f G r a v i t y a n d B u o y a n c y ........................................ 3010 Conditions for Equilibrium ............................................ 3014 R i g h t i n g M o m e n t a n d R i g h t i n g L e v e r .................................... 3017 P e r i o d o f R o l l....................................................... 3021 H e e l a n d T r i m ...................................................... 3024 E f f e c t s o f L o a d i n g ................................................... 3025 Off-Centre Loading .................................................. 3028 Effect of List on Stability .............................................. 3029 E f f e c t o f B a l l a s t ..................................................... 3030 T o p w e i g h t ......................................................... 3031 Effects of Flooding ................................................... 3032 Free-Surface Liquids ................................................. 3033 Subdivision of Free-Surface Liquids ..................................... 3035 C o r r e c t i o n o f L i s t.................................................... 3037 L o l l............................................................... 3042 R e d u c t i o n o f L o l l .................................................... 3051 Use of Fin Stabilizers After Damage ..................................... 3057 E f f e c t o f H e e l a n d T r i m o n F i g h t i n g E f f i c i e n c y ............................ 3059 Stability Information ................................................. 3062 Stability Statement ................................................... 3064 Curves of Statical Stability ............................................ 3065 H y d r o s t a t i c P a r t i c u l a r s................................................ 3066BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-3 Change 3CHAPTER 30 BASIC SHIP STABILITY 3001. Stability Knowledge Requirements All members of a Ships Company should have some knowledge of the elementary principles of ship stability. This chapter provide s, in easily understood terms, a basic explanation of those principles and the associated terminology. The subject is dealt with in greater detail insubsequent chapters, so there is inten tionally some duplication of information. 3002. This chapter and the succeeding chapters provide guidance to tackle many problems encountered with ship stability. Information and data provided by the NBCD Class Book and issued with the Stability Statement, together with the principles provided in these chapters will allow sensible conclusions to be drawn and appropriate actions to be taken. Submarine stabilityis covered separate ly in BR 21704. There is no substitute for experience and previous training whenever possible advice should be sought after any incident or prior to any unusual loading situation which may jeopardise the stability of the ship. Advice can in the first instance be soughtfrom the MEO or DMEO, further specialist a dvice maybe obtained from any ME 106 trained g47 officer the HEO of larger ships CVSLPD LPH or direct from the Naval Support Command. In all circumstances, if the ship is to be operated outside the Design Intent as stated in theCertificate of Safety - Stability, both the Operating and Design Authorities must be informed anda concession sought at the earliest opportunity as required by JSP 430 - Sh ip Safety Management System Handbook. 3003. The stability of a ship in the transverse or athwartships direction is much more easily prejudiced than that in a fore-and-aft direction this chapter is therefore almost wholly concernedwith transverse stability. 3004. Flotation A flat sheet of metal placed in a tank of water will sink to the bottom, and the volume of water displaced by it will be e qual to the volume of the sheet of metal. If the sheet of metal is moulded into the form of a watertight box it will float on the surface of the water the volume of water then displaced will be equal to the volume of the immersed part of the box, and its weight will be equal to the weight of the box. 3005. Displacement The facts are illustrated in Fig 30-1, which re presents a boat weighing 2.6 tonnes lowered into a tank of water. When the boat is water borne, 2.6 tonnes of water are displaced, the volume of which is equal to the immersed volume shown sh aded of the boat. If a weight of one tonne is placed in the boat she will sink down into the water until 3.6 tonnes of wa ter are displaced, and the volume of water displaced will again be e qual to the volume shown shaded of the immersed part of the boat. The weight of water displaced always equals the weight of the floating objectand is referred to as her displacement .BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-4 UK RESTRICTED Fig 30-1. Flotation and Displacement 3006. If the boat heels to one side the shape of the immersed part of her hull will alter, but the volume will remain the same. In Fig 30-2 the volume of the shaded portion A equals that of theshaded portion B, and the weight of water displaced is the same in each instance. Fig 30-2. Heel and Immersed Section Contour 3007. Buoyant Volume The buoyant volume of a ship is the volume of th e entire watertight part of the hull. That part of the buoyant volume belo w the waterline is called her buoyancy , and that part above the waterline is called her reserve of buoyancy Fig 30-3. Fig 30-3. Buoyant VolumeUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-5 Original 3008. Additional loading or flooding after damage w ill sink a ship lower into the water. Part of the reserve buoyancy then becomes the buoyancy. It is the reserve of buoyancy which largely determines the ships ability to float after flooding damage. 3009. The freeboard is the height above the waterline, at the ships side, of the highest continuous watertight deck. As most ships are nearly wallsided perpendicular above the waterline the freeboard give s an approximate measure of the reserve of buoyancy. 3010. Centre of Gravity and Buoyancy A ships ability to float depends upon two f actors - her total weight or displacement and her buoyancy. Fig 30-4. Centre of Gravity Fig 30-5. Centre of BuoyancyBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-6 UK RESTRICTED 3011. The total weight is the sum of the weights of everything in the ship, including that of all the structure, machinery, armament, fittings, stores, fuel and Ships Company, and it can bevisualised as the effect of exerting a single force through a central point which is called the centre of gravity usually indicated by the letter G, see Fig 30-4. 3012. Buoyancy is the upward force exerted on the ships hull by the water when she is floating, and it is equal to the weight of water she displaces. Although this force is distributed over all the underwater surface of the ships hull it al so can be resolved into a single force exerted through a central point which is called the centre of buoyancy usually indicated by the letter B, see Fig 30-5. 3013. A ships hull is symmetrical about a fore-and-aft vertical plane, so B is on the middle line when the ship is floating upright and as the weight in this condition must be distributedsymmetrically about this plane, G is also on the middle line. 3014. Conditions for Equilibrium For a ship to float in equilibrium the buoyancy force pushing upward on the underwater part of the hull must be equal to the total weight of the ship, and as these two forces balance oneanother they must be acting in th e same straight line Fig 30-7i. 3015. When two equal and opposite forces acting on the same object are not in line these are known as a couple and produce a moment tending to rotate the object this moment is found by multiplying the perpendicular distance between the lines of action of the forces by the forceof one of them. This is illustrated by the example at Fig 30-6. Moment 5 tonnes 2 me tres 10 tonnes-metres Fig 30-6. Couple and Moment 3016. If a ship is heeled over by some external force such as wind or wave, the weight, and hence the position of the centre of gravity, will, for all practical purposes, remain unaltered butas the shape of the submerged part of the hull will be changed, the centre of buoyancy, B, willmove from the middle line towards the lower side of the ship to B 1, as shown in Fig 30-7ii. Hence the forces of weight and buoyancy are out of line and therefore produce a moment tending to return the vessel to an upright position and she is said to be in stable equilibrium .UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-7 Original Fig 30-7. 3017. Righting Moment and Righting Lever In Fig 30-7ii the righting moment acting on the ship is calculated by multiplying the displacement, W, by the horizontal distance between the resolved forces of weight and buoyancy, GZ. This horizontal distance GZ, which separates the forces of weight and buoyancy as the ship heels, is called the righting lever . 3018. The stability of a ship ie her resistance to heeling forces at any angle of heel is given by her righting moment, which depends on the size and shape of the submerged part of the hull which determines the position of B and also on the distribution of the weights of stores, fuel, weapons, machinery, etc which determines the pos ition of G. As the weight and the centre of gravity of a ship remain unaltered apart from small differences due to free liquids when she isheeled by an external force, her stability can be judged by the length of the righting lever GZ atthe particular displacement. 3019. Thus it will be seen that the stability of a ship depends on three factors a. The shape of her hull both of the part normally underwater and the part liable to be submerged as the ship rolls which determin es the position and movement of the centre of buoyancy. b. The arrangement of all weights such as the hull, machinery, stores, weapons and fuel, etc, which determines the position of the centre of gravity. c. The positions of the centres of gravity and buoyancy in relation to each other and to the ship.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-8 UK RESTRICTED 3020. In designing a ships hull, a compromise must be reached between the requirements of speed, capacity and stability. Too much weight above the centre of gravity, due tosuperstructures, weapons, radar equipment, etc, may raise the centre of gravity enough to make her top heavy and endanger her stability. Ag ain, a ship whose beam is unduly narrow may not have a sufficiently large righting lever and thus righting moment to enable her to recover froma heavy roll. A warship, also, must be designed with enough margin of stability to keep her stable when damage d and partly flooded. Fig 30-8. Period of Roll 3021. Period of Roll When a ship is rolling, the righting moment produced depends upon the severity of the roll, ie how far the ship rolls from the upright. This righting moment W x GZ in Fig 30-8 willoppose the roll away from the upright position and hasten the roll back to it. 3022. A ship with a large righting moment ie good stability will usually roll rapidly. Conversely, a ship with a small righting moment ie poor stability will usually roll sluggishly. The period of a ships rolling can thus give an indication of her stability. 3023. A ship which is too lively will be uncomfortable her violent movements may even carry away fittings and, if a warship, will make it diffi cult to use the weapons effectiv ely or operate aircraft. If too sluggish, however, she will be unsafe in heavy weather, so a compromise in theserespects has to be achieved by the designer. 3024. Heel and Trim a.Heel. This is the athwartships inclination of a ship to either side from the vertical however caused a sailing vessel, for example, may be heeled by the wind to her leewardside. b.List. This is a heel caused by off-centre loading, ie G is not on the middle line. c.Trim. This is the inclination of the ships designed horizontal fore and aft plane with the surface of the water in which she floats. It is the difference between thedraughts forward and aft. Warships are generally trimmed down by the stern.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-9 Original 3025. Effects of Loading The effects on her stability of adding a weight to a ship will depend on the size and position of the weight, but it will always result in the mean draught of the ship being increasedand in her centre of gravity being moved toward s the added weight. Th e latter effect can be illustrated by the simple example given in Figs 30-9 and 30-10. 3026. If two equal weights are hung equidistantly from the middle point of a metal bar it will balance about that point because that is th e centre of gravity of the whole Fig 30-9. Fig 30-9. Centre of Gravity Fig 30-10. Movement of Centre of Gravity 3027. If another weight is added on one side of the support as shown in Fig 30-10, the support will have to be moved from the middle towards the heavier end in order to preserve the balanceof the whole. In other words, the centre of gravity of the whole has moved towards the added weight. 3028. Off-Centre Loading When a heavy weight is added on either side of a ship, her centre of gravity moves towards that of the added weight, ie from G to G 1 in Fig 30-11i. The weight and buoyancy forces are no longer in the same vertical line and so they produce a moment which will list theship towards the side on which the weight was added. As the ship lists, so B moves towards thelow side until it reaches position B 1 vertically below G1 as shown in Fig 30-11ii.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-10 UK RESTRICTED Fig 30-11. Effect of Off-Centre Loading Then, with the centres of buoyancy and gravity once more in the same vertical line, the ship will float in equilibrium in the inclined or listed position. The opposite effect is caused by removing a weight, ie the centre of gravity moves away from the centre of gravity of the removed weightand the ship will list away. 3029. Effect of List on Stability It may be said that the stability of a ship is reduced by a list because G has moved off the middle line. In Fig 30-12, G has moved to G 1 and B has moved to B1. Any further heel by an external force in the same direction as the list will produce a smaller righting lever at the particular angle of heel than it would if G we re still on the middle line in Fig 30-12, for example, G1Z1 is less than GZ. Fig 30-12. Effect of List on Stability 3030. Effect of Ballast If ballast is added low down in a ship, the position of the centre of gravity will be lowered and stability will be increase d. In Fig 30-13, G has moved to G1 making G1Z1 greater than GZ.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-11 Original Fig 30-13. Effect of Ballast 3031. Topweight If a weight is added high in the ship the centre of gravity will be raised, eg from G to G2 in Fig 30-14i, and the stability will then be reduced. In Fig 30-14ii, for example, G2Z2 is less than GZ. Top-weight is therefore dangerous and must be kept to the essential minimum. Asimilar effect results from raising weight vertically in a ship. Removal of top-weight, however,lowers G and improves stability. Increase in top-weight can arise from such diverse causes asunauthorized additions to structure or fittings, unnecessary accumulations of paint coatings,equipment and obsolete fittings, a nd severe icing of topsides. Ships operating in or near the Arctic or Antarctic may experience heavy icin g of superstructure, weather decks and exposed equipment. Apart from the loss of stability caused by topweight, the ice may be asymmetricallopsided and will then cause list. Other evils are overloading of decks, masts and aerialsslippery decks, interference with the handling and operation of topside weapons and equipment. Information on ice prevention and removal is given in Chapter 17. Fig 30-14. Effect of TopweightBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-12 UK RESTRICTED 3032. Effects of Flooding Completely flooding a compartme nt will have exactly the sa me effect on the stability of a ship as adding a solid substance of equal we ight at the centre of gravity of the flood water Fig 30-13. For example, completely filling a centre line fuel tank would ballast the ship andso improve her stability. 3033. Free-Surface Liquids If a fuel or other tank is only partly filled, however, the liquid in it has what is called a free surface , being free to run across to the low side as the ship heels or rolls. This will have the effect of moving the centre of gravity of the ship towards the low side, thus reducing the rightinglever, so that in the example in Fig 30-15, G 1Z is less than GZ. Fig 30-15. Effect of Free-Surface Liquid 3034. Free-surface liquid therefore reduces stability. The free-surface effect ie reduction of stability depends on the area mainly width of the free-surface liquid but not on the quantity. If liquid with a free surface is added to compartments high up in the ship, during firefighting forexample, it will have a more adverse effect on the ships stability than if it were added low down,because it will combine the bad eff ects of free surface and topweight. 3035. Subdivision of Free-Surface Liquids If the tank in the example above were fitte d with a middle-line bulkhead Fig 30-16 the centre of gravity of the liquid in it will not move so far from the middle line when the ship heelsor rolls, because the two smaller volumes of liqui d will move through shorter distances the loss of righting lever and stability will therefore not then be so great. Fig 30-16. Subdivision of Free-Surface LiquidUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-13 Original3036. For this reason longidinal bulkheads may be f itted in fuel and water tanks to break up the free-surface and so reduce its effect on th e ships stability. For the same reason, and excepting hangars, large areas of unbroken deck space are avoided in warship design as far as possible. 3037. Correction of List Unless caused by damage, list is usually easy to correct. All that is required is to balance the ship and so bring the centre of gravity back to the middle line. There are three ways of doingthis a. By removing the off-centre loading, or an equivalent weight on the low side. b. By adding an equivalent weight on the high side. c. By shifting weights from the low side to the high side. 3038. For a damaged ship with off-centre flooding cau sing a list that is, generally, a large ship the first method is usually impr acticable because flood water ca nnot be removed from compartments which are open to the sea, and the weight of this water is so great that there isnothing that can be removed from the lo w side heavy enough to compensate it. 3039. The second method usually affords the quickest way to correct list because, in big ships, the equivalent weight can be added by admitting sea water to wing compartments on the highside as counterflooding. In such ships, valves are usually fitted low down in wing watertight compartments so that they can be flooded direct from the sea. 3040. The last method is theoretically the best because it avoids the increase of the ships displacement produced by method b. In practice, however, it usually means transferring fuel or other liquids across the ship, which is a slow pro cess and not suited to the rapid correction of list. However, when the list has been reduced to a safe angle by counterflooding, pumping across of liquids is undertaken and, concurre ntly, pumping out counterflood water. 3041. List caused by flooding is unusual in DDFF and smaller ships because there is little or no longitudinal subdivision. 3042. Loll The term loll is applied to the state of a ship which is unstable when in an upright position and therefore floats at an angle or heel to one side or the other indi fferently. If disturbed by some external force, such as wind or waves, the ship will lurch to the same angle of loll onthe opposite side. Loll is quite different from lis t, being caused by diffe rent circumstances and requiring different counter measures to correct it, and it is ther efore most important that sea-going personnel should be able to distinguish between the two. 3043. Loll may be caused either by a large area especially breadth of free-surface liquid inside the hull or by a large addition of top-weight the following example shows how it may be caused by free-surface liquid.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-14 UK RESTRICTED 3044. In the description of free surface it was shown that the effect of free-surface liquid was to reduce the righting lever by shifting G towards Z. The greater the extent of flooding by free- surface water the further will G move away from the middle line when the ship heels. 3045. Consider a frigate with free flooded main-com partments extending right across the ship. If the ship heels to starboard, for example, as shown in an exaggerated form in Fig 30-17, the water in the flooded compartments will run across to starboard and shift G so far that it may well pass beyond B1 to the position G1. Fig 30-17. Free-surface Liquid Effect on G 3046. The centre of gravity G1 of the flooded ship is now beyond the centre of buoyancy B1, and these two forces are tending to heel the ship still more instead of returning her to the uprightposition. 3047. As the ship heels over further, however, th e centre of buoyancy will also move further to starboard and the ship will come to rest at an angle of heel at which the centres of gravity andbuoyancy, G 1 and B1, are again in line as shown in Fig 30-18. The cross-sectional shape of the hull determines the extent to which th e centre of buoyancy can move, and if G1 is still beyond B1 when the latter has reached the limit of its travel, the ship will capsize. Fig 30-18. Loll to Starboard Fig 30-19. Loll to PortUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-15 Change 13048. If, due to a change of course or to action by wind or waves, the ship heels over to port, the water in the flooded compartments will flow acr oss the ship from starboard to port, and she will come to rest heeled to port at an angle equal to that of her previous heel to starboardFig 30-19. 3049. An exactly similar effect would be caused by an excessive amount of top-weight being placed in the ship, thereby raising the centre of gr avity to a dangerous extent. This is illustrated in Figs 30-18 and 30-19, in which G 2 represents the raised centre of gravity caused by top-weight. It will be seen that the vertical line of action of the force exerted by the weight of the ship passesthrough both G 2 and G1. In this case the centre of gravity is fixed and does not move from one side to the other with the heel of the ship, but the effect is the same as that caused by free-surfaceliquid. 3050. In each case the ship is unstable when upright and also when heeled to port or starboard up to the angle where B and G are in the same vertical plane. 3051. Reduction of Loll There are four ways to reduce loll a. Remove weights from high up in the ship.b. Reduce the area, especially the breadth, of free-surface liquid.c. Add weight low down in the ship.d. Shift weights from high in the ship to lower levels. 3052. The choice of method or methods to be used depends on the causes of the loll and the means available in the ship for correcting it. 3053. The first method is probably the most practicab le, especially in small ships, and produces a double improvement because it lightens the shi p, increasing her reserve of buoyancy, and also lowers her centre of gravity. It is effected by jettisoning movable gear from the upper decks, but care must be taken to do this evenly each side of the middle line, and not to jettison damage- control, firefighting or lifesaving equipment, or ready-use ammunition if further attack seems probable. Lists of suitable equipment should be prepared in the order in which they may be jettisoned so that this method can be used quickly and correctly should the need ever arise. Such items as boats which should be tied up aft, torpedoe s, helicopters and anc hors may be included. Some guidance on preparing a Jettison Bill for the ship is given in Chapter 10. 3054. The second method is to plug leaks and pump out water drain to lower and, if possible, narrower compartments use longitudinal dwa rf bulkheads - which may be quite temporary arrangements - to break up the free-surface area or completely empty or fill tanks which contain liquid, according to whether they are high or low in the ship.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-16 UK RESTRICTED3055. The third method is to flood compartments or tanks low down in the ship to their full capacity and thus ballast the ship. It is effective in lowering the centre of gravity, but has thedisadvantage of loading the ship still further a nd thereby reducing her reserve of buoyancy. If this method is employed it is important that th e flooding should be carri ed out evenly each side of the middle line of the ship to avoid introducing a list in addition to the existing loll. 3056. Apart from draining down of floodwater, th e fourth method is usually impracticable g47 because movable objects small enough to be lowere d through hatches are not usually of sufficient weight to appreciably affect the centre of grav ity. If they were heavy enough, they would then be difficult to shift, particularly if the ship was lolling to a large angle. 3057. Use of Fin Stabilizers After Damage Fin type stabilizer are fitted to warships to minimize roll and assi st in weapon operation. They should not be used for heel co rrection after damage for two reasons a. Ships with fin stabilizers are designed so that list after damage is slight, if any. If the ship has a large angle of heel after damage, she is almost certainly lolling. Anyattempt to correct loll by applying heeling moments, using the stabilizers, could resultin the ship lolling to a greater and possibly dangerous angle on the side remote from theoriginal loll. b. Conventional methods of heel correction after damage Para 3037 restore to the ship a capacity to withstand further dama ge which does not de pend on maintenance of ship speed. Should initial heel correction be obtained by the use of stabilizers, and further damage cause serious loss of mobility, the resulting heeling moments andor lossof stability from both incidents would be cumulative, possibly with seriousconsequences. 3058. If enough speed can be maintained after dama ge to make the stabilizers effective, they may be used to minimize roll, thus effectively augmenting the inherent ship stability remainingafter heel correction and damage control action have been taken. 3059. Effect of Heel and Trim on Fighting Efficiency Excessive heel from any cause will reduce the fighting efficiency of the ship in a number of ways, of which the following are examples. a. It is difficult for personnel to get about the ship and carry out their duties properly when the ship is heeled. b. Heel may restrict the effectiveness of w eapons. It also entails increased effort to move any manually trained equipm ent. Six degrees is about the largest angle of heel at which a ships armament can be effectively fought. c. Speed and manoeuvrability are reduced by heel.d. The efficiency of some machinery, su ch as fixed pumps which depend for their operation on the maintenance of a steady liquid level, is reduced if the ship is muchheeled.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-17 Original3060. For information on the effects of heel on th e operation of aircraft and helicopters refer to BR 766 - Aircraft Operating Handbook. 3061. Trim does not have any appreciable effect on fighting efficiency or stability unless it is so large that the freeboard at the low end is reduced to the point where the seaworthiness of theship is endangered, or the forecas tle or quarterdeck is under water. 3062. Stability Information All ships are supplied with the following stability information a. Stability statement.b. Curves of statical stability GZ curves.c. Hydrostatic particulars. 3063. All RN surface ships and RFAs have an NBCD Class Book CB 4538 Series, which contains much useful information, including st ability characteristics and also various examples of flooding with the resulting stability conditions. Some ships are issued with a Ship Stability and Survivability Book in the CB 9500 Series. 3064. Stability Statement This gives draught, metacentric height, an gle of maximum stability and range, usually in the light, average action and deep conditions or deep, light seagoing and light harbour conditions, which are defined in the statement. Details of any fixed ballast and instructions on working of fuel may also be given. 3065. Curves of Statical Stability These, generally called GZ curves, are usua lly given for the same conditions of loading as the stability statement. They show the length of the righting lever at all angles of heel, up tothe angle at which the ship loses all transverse stability in the particul ar condition, and indicate the angle at which the deck edge will be immersed and the angle at which the righting lever isgreatest. 3066. Hydrostatic Particulars These are tables which give, for different draughts over a wide range, the designed stability characteristics of the ship, including displacement, tonnes per centimetre immersion, moment to change trim one centimetre, height of transverse and longitudinal metacentres, and fore-and-aft position of the centre of flotation.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 30-18 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-1 Change 1CHAPTER 31 STABILITY OF THE INTACT SHIP CONTENTS Para Determination of Stability Characteristics ................................. 3101 F o r c e s O p e r a t i n g .................................................... 3103 B u o y a n c y .......................................................... 3104 W e i g h t ............................................................ 3105 S t a n d a r d L o a d i n g C o n d i t i o n s........................................... 3106 Equilibrium ........................................................ 3107 A d d i t i o n o f W e i g h t .................................................. 3108 Tonnes Per Centimetr e Immersion TPC ................................. 3109 M o v e m e n t o f C e n t r e s o f B u o y a n c y a n d G r a v i t y d u e t o C h a n g e s i n L o a d i n g ...... 3111 R e s e r v e o f B u o y a n c y ................................................. 3112 Transverse Stability .................................................. 3113 Metacentre ......................................................... 3114 R i g h t i n g M o m e n t.................................................... 3115 g47 Metacentric Height ................................................... 3116 Stability at Small Angles of Heel ........................................ 3118 F i n d i n g t h e A n g l e o f H e e l f o r S m a l l M o v e m e n t s o f W e i g h t................... 3119 Free Surface Effects .................................................. 3120 Stability at Larger Angles of Heel ....................................... 3122 Curves of Statical Stability ............................................ 3123 A d j u s t m e n t o f t h e G Z C u r v e f o r L o a d i n g C o n d i t i o n s ........................ 3124 H o r i z o n t a l M o v e m e n t o f W e i g h t s ....................................... 3125 V e r t i c a l M o v e m e n t o f W e i g h t s ......................................... 3126 C a u s e s o f a n d R e a c t i o n s t o L i s t a n d L o l l.................................. 3127 Longitudinal Stability ................................................ 3128 Stability Methods .................................................... 3129 Addition of Weight and Daily Stability Assessment ......................... 3130 A d d i t i o n o f L i q u i d s .................................................. 3131 A d j u s t i n g t h e G Z C u r v e f o r M o v e m e n t s o f W e i g h t ......................... 3132 C h a n g e i n T r i m D u e t o M o v e m e n t o f W e i g h t L o n g i t u d i n a l l y.................. 3133BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-3 Change 1CHAPTER 31 STABILITY OF THE INTACT SHIP 3101. Determination of St ability Characteristics Two things determine the stability characteristics of a ship a. The geometry of the underwater form of the hull.b. The loading of the ship. Of these, the former is determined by the Naval Architect and can not be altered by the operator. This information is provided by means of hydros tatic data. The latter is planned by the Naval Architect, however its control is the predomin ate concern of the operator both on a daily and longer term basis. 3102. To fully understand the implications of the ope rators actions on the stability of the ship it is first important to appreciate the mechanics and principles of ship stability. 3103. Forces Operating When a ship is floating in water there are three forces operating on the structure. a. The total weight of all the constituent parts of the ship and contents, which exerts a force vertically downwards through the centre of gravity. b. The buoyancy force created by the underwat er form of the hull displacing water, which exerts a force vertically upw ards through the centre of buoyancy. c. Other forces which cause the ship to move as a result of their action, such as propulsive forces, resistance, wi nd, waves and changes in loading. The primary concern of ship stability is to ensure that the first two forces act together in such a way as to provide a stable platfo rm that can cope with the last group of forces without capsize. 3104. Buoyancy Archimedes Principle states that A body fully or partially immerse d in a fluid will experience an upthrust equal to the weight of fluid displaced. This upthrust is called the buoyancy force . In order to calculate the magnitude of this force the Volume Displacement of the ship g76 and the density of the sea must be multiplied to give a value for the Mass Displacement of the ship . g76BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-4 UK RESTRICTED The value of is most easily found from the hydrostatic data for the ship where it is given for various mean draughts T in standa rd seawater of density 1.025 tonnesm3. The buoyancy force, which is equal to , will act vertically up through the centre of buoyancy B which is the centroid of the underwater volume of the hull. Again its position is provided in the shipshydrostatic data for different va lues of T and expressed as a di stance KB above the ships keel K. The buoyant volume of a ship is the volume of the entire watertight part of the hull. That part of the buoyant volume above the waterline is called the reserve of buoyancy . Fig 31-1. Buoyancy and Weight 3105. Weight The weight W of a ship is difficult to measure due to the size of the structure. It is possible to calculate this during the design stage by summing all the individual components but this is impractical for the operator. Instead, finding the total weight relies on the condition ofequilibrium the ship adopts when it is freely floatin g. The weight of the ship acts vertically down through the centre of gravity G which again is difficult to find as it depends on the position and weight of all the individual co mponents of the ship. The position of G is found by conducting an Inclining Experiment, the results of which are provided to the operator in the form of theStability Statement whereby its ve rtical distance KG above the keel K is stated for various standard loading conditions. Alterations to th ese standard conditions to find the position of G for specific loading conditions are relatively simple. 3106. Standard Loading Conditions Generally ships have three standard loading conditions a.Deep Condition. The ship is in all respects complete fully complemented, ammunitioned, fuelled, st ored and provisioned. b.Light Seagoing Condition. The lightest condition of a ship at sea including any g47 liquid loading restrictions required to meet the minimum stability criteria. c.Light Harbour Condition. The lightest condition of a ship in harbour including any liquid loading restrictions required to meet the minimum stability criteria.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-5 Original 3107. Equilibrium Under normal circumstances a surface ship w ould be in a condition whereby it will sink until such time as it reaches a draught great e nough to provide an underw ater volume displacing enough weight of water to produce a buoyancy for ce equal to the weight of the ship. Generally this is expressed by describing both the weight of the ship and the buoyancy force produced as being equal to the Mass Displacement of the ship . Although mass displacement is measured in tonnes it is treated as a force neglecting the gravitational constant in all further expressions. Fig 31-2. Equilibrium 3108. Addition of Weight The Centre of Flotation CF is the centroid of the waterplane at which the ship is currently floating, the ship will trim and heel about this point, which is generally on the centreline and abaft midships. If a weight w is added to the ship so that its centre of gravity g is above CF, so that there is no heeling or trimming moment, the ship will sink until the increase in draught produces an increase in volume displ acement, producing and additional buoyancy force equal to the added weight. An increase of draught in this way, where there is no heeling ortrimming moment induced, is called Parallel Sinkages .BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-6 UK RESTRICTEDs w TPC cm Fig 31-3. Addition of Weight It can be seen from Fig 31-3 that the buoyancy fo rce created by the additional layer of displaced volume acts through a point b and must be equal to the added weight, w. 3109. Tonnes Per Centimetre Immersion TPC For reasonably small additions of weight wa rships can be assumed to be wall-sided having vertical side plating. This assumption allows the calculation of parallel sinkageproduced by a known addition of weight to be grea tly simplified. The weig ht in tonnes required to sink the ship by 1cm can be found and plotted against the original draught of the ship, this figure is known as the Tonnes Per Centimet re Immersion TPC , and is presented in the ships hydrostatic data for va lues of mean draught. 3110. Given that the TPC for the original draught of the ship is known, the parallel sinkage s caused by any addition of weight W can be calculated such that Particular care should be taken us ing this expression for large additions of weight, especially where the value for TPC changes considerably in the area of the parallel sinkage. In this case itis prudent to calculate the parallel sinkage using both the TPC at the original draught and theTPC at the new draught and averaging them. 3111. Movement of Centres of Buoyancy a nd Gravity due to Ch anges in Loading An alteration to the loading of the ship will effect the positions of B and G a. B will always move upwards due to the addition of weight, ie towards the centroid of the new slice of displaced volume b.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-7 Change 1 KB KB. Kb.w w where Kb T 0.5 x s T original draught s parallel sinkage KG KG. Kg.w w1 1g68 g68 g68 g68b. G will always move towards the centre of gravity of the added weight g. The opposite is true if th e weight is removed. The new positions of the centre of buoyancy B1 and gravity G1 can be found by taking 1st moments, multiplying the force by its lever arm, about the keel and dividing by the total mass displacement. Fig 31-4. Movement of Centres of Buoyance B and Gravity G g47 g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47g47 3112. Reserve of Buoyancy When a surface ship is floating some of its hull is normally above the surface of the sea. If a weight is added the ship will sink further into the sea so that increases. Weight could continue to be added to the ship until such time as its uppermost watertight deck is underwaterBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-8 UK RESTRICTED whereafter it would sink. The portion of the ships watertight hull above the waterline is known as the Reserve of Buoyancy , and is expressed as a proporti on or percentage of the immersed volume. The reserve of buoyancy of a surface wa rship is of the order of 100 or more and therefore loss of ships by bodily sinking is very unusual. 3113. Transverse Stability When a ship heels over due to an internal movement of weight or as a reaction to an external force there is no increase in the weight of the ship and hence no increase in . So long as none of the weights making up th e total weight of the ship move, ie the ship is secured for sea, G will not move, irrespective of the angle of heel. The weight of the ship, equal to will continue to act vertically down through G. The position of B, however, depends on the shape of the underwater volume of the ship and will move as the ship heels over. As the ship heels over a wedge of additional buoyancy is formed on the lower side a nd a corre sponding wedge emerges from the other side to keep the buoyancy force the same. These wedges have their own centroids and by taking moments it can be seen that the ships centre of buoyancy will move towards the Immersed Wedge Fig 31-5. Fig 31-5. Movement of Centre of Buoyancy B The buoyancy force continues to act vertically upwards through the centre of buoyancy which has a new position B1, but now buoyancy and weight for ces are separated and under normal circumstances will attempt to return the ship to the upright position. 3114. Metacentre The point at which the line of action of the buoyancy force intersects the original vertical centreline of the ship is known as the Metacentre M , as shown in Fig 31-6. The buoyancy force and the weight under these circum stances continue to be equal to the mass displacement of the ship, as no weight has been added, but now act as a moment couple which will try to bring the ship upright.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-9 Original Fig 31-6. Metacentre M It can therefore be seen that the ability of the ship to return itself to the upright position is dependant on this moment couple, formed by the movement of the centre of buoyancy, being positive. This moment couple will remain positiv e whilst the metacentre is above the centre of gravity. The position of M can be found from th e ships hydrostatic data at various mean draughts, as a distance KM from the keel of the ship. 3115. Righting Moment By taking moments about the keel Fig 31-7 it can be seen that the moment acting to return the ship to the upright position is given by Righting Moment GZ x now GZ GM sin so Righting Moment GMsinBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-10 UK RESTRICTED Fig 31-7. Righting Moment The distance GM therefore provide s a measurement of the stability of the ship. It is known as the Metacentric Height . 3116. Metacentric Height By examination of the metacentric height and Fig 31-7 it can be seen that three states of stability exist. a.Positive Stability. If the metacentric height is positive the ship will be stable. b.Neutral Stability. If the metacentric height reduces to zero, ie G and M coincide then the ship becomes neutrally stable. c.Negative Stability. If the metacentric height is negative then the ship is negatively stable and will tend to heel to a greater angle. The size of the metacentric heig ht also indicates the amount of stability a ship possesses a large positive metacentric height will pr ovide a large righting lever and consequently the ship will be very stable. Conversely a sma ll metacentric height will provide a small righting lever and the ship will be less stable. A ship with a large metacentric heig ht is said to be stiff and one with a small metacentric height is known as tender .UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-11 Change 13117. The metacentric height of a ship depends on two things a. The position of G.b. The position of M. The position of G is found by adjusting the valu e for KG given in the Stability Statement for a standard loading condition, by using the equati on at Para 3111 for movements of weights away from this standard condition. The complete method is provided at Para 3130. The position of M is dependant on the position of B as it moves w ith the angle of heel. The distance of M above B relies on the volume displacement of the ship a nd the second moment of area of the waterplane of the ship. Calculation of th is second moment of area is time consuming and impractical for the operator requiring quick answers to concerns over the ships stability. It is enough to appreciate that the dominant factor in producing a high position for M and thus generally increasing GM g47 is the breadth of the ship and is thus outside the control of the operator. In practice the positionof M when the ship is in an upright condition is gained by reference to the ships hydrostatic datafor the draught at which the ship is floating. The metacentric height can therefore be found as GM KM - KG 3118. Stability at Small Angles of Heel The movement of the centre of buoyancy as th e ship heels over is dependent on the shape of the underwater form of the ship and this in turn determines the position of the metacentre and hence the magnitude of the metacentric height. The shape of the ships hull as it heels is notregular and so B cannot be generally expected to move in a regular pattern therefore the position of M will change with heel angle. However, the shape of a ship can be thought of as regular for angles up to 10, therefore the position of M can be assumed to be fixed for angles of heel within this range. The metacentric height found for the ship in an upright position in Para 3117 can therefore be used for all angles of heel up to 10. 3119. Finding the Angle of Heel for Small Movements of Weight The heeling moment acting as a ship caused by the horizontal movement of a weight is given by Heeling Moment wdcos BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-12 UK RESTRICTED Fig 31-8. Angle of Heel for Small Movement of Weight Therefore, to find the angle of heel the heelin g and righting moments can be equated to give Heeling Moment Righting Moment wdcos GMsin so tan wd GMg102g68 This equation can now be solved by assuming that GM remains constant for angles of heel up to 10. 3120. Free Surface Effects Liquid in any compartment, anywhere in the ship, which does not entirely fill the compartment has an adverse effect on the stability of the ship. Such liquid is said to have freesurface. As the ship heels, the centre of gravity of the liquid shifts to the low inclined side. The result of this can be viewed as either an increasing heeling moment, or a reduction in the rightinglever. In practice we normally regard the effect as equivalent to raising the centre of gravity,which has the effect of reducing the metacentric height and hence the righting lever. It can beshown that for small angles of heel the reduction in GM is given byUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-13 Change 2Loss of GM i1 sg114 g209g114 where i the second moment of area of th e liquid surface area about a principal axis parallel to the axis of rotation of the ship. l the density of the liquid concerned. s the density of the sea water. g76 the volume displacement of the ship. The righting lever for the ship can now be assu med to be dependent on this reduced GM, often termed the GMfluid which is given by GMfluid GM - loss in GM Calculation of the second moment of area for an irregular shape is time consuming. However many compartments in a ship are rectangular or close to being so and the second moment of area of a rectangle length a longitudinally and breadth b transversely, is i a b312 3121. This loss of initial stability is entirely depe ndant on the Second Moment of Area of the free surface, and in particular the breadth. The depth, volume or weight of liquid present playno part in the formula. Also the loss of GM o ccurs irrespective of the position of the free surface in the ship. However the position of G is also affected by weight low down the weight serves as ballast high up is to topweight, and to port or starboard it is off-centre weight. It can be seen that the worst combination is of a free surfaced liquid high up in a ship causing loss of GM bytopweight and free surface effect. This rise in the G can quickly result in a state of loll with theassociated loss in stability and re quires rapid and correct reactions to be taken to avoid putting the ship in danger of capsize. High free surface effects can easily be caused by water used infirefighting and boundary cooling, many ships ha ve capsized because firefighting water was not pumped out, drained overboard, or drained down. The free surface can rapidly become moredangerous than the fire itself. If the free su rface cannot be removed, ever y effort should be made to divide its breadth. The divisi on need not even be completely wa tertight to be effective, and mess tables on edge can be most successful. Divi ding the compartment into two units of equal breadth reduces the loss in GM by four divisi on by three would reduce loss by nine, and so on. Conversely, if a free surface ar ea is doubled in breadth, the loss in GM becomes eight times as great. The complete method for assessing st ability with a free surface effect is given at Para 3131. g47 3122. Stability at Larger Angles of Heel Fundamentally the mechanics invol ved with stability at larger angles of heel are identical to those previously discussed with the excepti on that GM can no longer be assumed to remain constant. It was shown in Para 3115 that Righting Moment GZBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-14 UK RESTRICTED This equation still holds for all angles larger than 10 but now account must be taken of the changing underwater form of the hull, which will change the magnitude of GZ for different angles of heel the metacentre can no longer be t hought to be stationary. Determination of the magnitude of GZ involves complicated calcula tions far beyond the abilities of the average operator. To this end values of GZ ar e provided for the ship in the form of a Curve of Statical Stability . 3123. Curves of Statical Stability Curves of Statical Stability are provided to the ship as part of the Stability Statement. Normally three curves are presented, one each for the standard loading c onditions. The curve shows the value of the righting lever for an gles of heel throughout the range of stab ility of the ship the righting moment at any angle of heel can therefore be found by multiplying GZ by . The GZ curve for a conventional ship in a nor mal condition will appear as shown in Fig 31-9. Fig 31-9. Curve of Statical Stability Several points and lines have been marked on this figure. They have the following significance a. At any angle of heel OA, the ship has a right moment of xPA. It requires a steady inclining moment, such as wind pressure or an off-centre weight, of this magnitude tohold her over at this angle. b. At small angles of heel, the righting lever depends on the metacentric height. This is confirmed in the diagram by the coincidence of the tangent to the curve at the origin0, and the curve for a few degrees of heel.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-15 Originalc. As the angle of heel in creases about say 10, the curve shows positive curvature, ie the steepness of the curve increases. At the point X the curvature changes and thesteepness decreases. The point of inflexion at X reflects the immersion of the edge ofthe main weatherdeck. d. As the heel increases further, the cu rve becomes horizontal at the angle B of maximum lever Q. e. Thereafter the curve descends, at first w ith increasing steepness, then more steadily. It crosses the base line at a point R called the point of vanishing stability, at which thereis no righting lever, and beyond which a capsizi ng lever is set up. This point defines the range of stability of the ship for her partic ular condition of loading and the angle OR is generally known as the range. f. Since the greatest righting moment that the ship can exert is xQB, corresponding to the maximum lever QB, it follows that this is the greatest steady upsetting momentwhich she can resist. The angle of maximum righting lever, therefore is the greatestangle of steady heel the ship can take up w ithout capsizing when inclined by a steady heeling moment. Some of these points on the curve, particularly at higher angles of heel, are somewhat academic as the point at which non-watertight openings ar e immersed represents a more realistic range of stability for the ship. Generally the non-water tight openings of most concern are the engine downtakes and their angle of immersion will be marked on the GZ curve provided to the ship.Angles of heel past this angle will usually re sult in unrestricted flooding of large compartments of the ship therefore seriously compromising the stability of the ship. 3124. Adjustment of the GZ Cu rve for Loading Conditions It should be appreciated that the value of GZ presented on the curve is dependent on the position of the centre of gravity, this is why the curves are provided for the three standard loadingconditions. In practice a ship is unlikely to be operating at a standard loading condition and so alterations have to be made to the curves to ascertain the true behaviour of the ship. 3125. Horizontal Movement of Weights The movement of any weight which constitute s a part of the whole displacement of a ship in a horizontal direction will cause G to m ove in the same direction. By taking moments about original centre of gravity G the distance to the new centre of gravity G 1 can be found such that GG wd 1g68 By referring to Fig 31-10, below, it can be seen th at this movement of G will have an effect on the righting lever so that G1Z1 G Z - G G1cosBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-16 UK RESTRICTED Fig 31-10. Horizontal Movement of Weight Consequently the modified GZ cu rve over the range of heel angles can be redrawn by subtracting the curve GG1cos from the original GZ curve. The resulting GZ curve is shown as the net righting lever in Fig 31-11. Fig 31-11. Net Righting LeverUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-17 Original The movement of the ships centre of gravity away from the centreline will result in the weightforce and buoyancy force not being collinear, they will not, therefore, be in equilibrium and the ship will heel over until the two points are aligned vertically. The angle of heel will be steadyand, so long as the metacentre remains above the centre of gravity, the ship will be stable. This condition of heel is known as List, and can be found as the inters ection of the net righting lever curve with the x-axis on the curve in Fig 31-11. 3126. Vertical Moveme nt of Weights The movement of any weight which constitutes a part of the whole displacement of a ship in a vertical direction will cause G to move in the same direction. By taking moments about the original centre of gravity G the distance to the new centre of gravity G 1 can be found, such that GG wd 1g68 By referring to Fig 31-12, below, it can be seen th at this movement of G will have an effect on the righting lever so that G1Z1 GZ - GG1sin Fig 31-12. Effect of Vert ical Movement of WeightBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-18 UK RESTRICTED Consequently the modified GZ cu rve can be drawn over the range of heel angles by subtracting the curve GG1sin from the original GZ curve. The resulting GZ curve is shown as the net righting lever in Fig 31-13. Fig 31-13. Effect of Rise of G The general effect of the centre of gravity rising in the ship is to reduce the maximum righting lever and range of stability of the ship. However, an interesting case occurs when GG1 is sufficiently large to take G above M, so that in the upright condition GM is negative. Rather than causing the ship to capsize, which might be exp ected, depending on the precise hull shape of the ship and the magnitude of the negative GM, a real situation can be reached where the ship willlurch to one side but recover a measure of stab ility. This is illustrated in Fig 31-13. The angle of heel is known as the angle of Loll. While the diagram shows that because of the nature of the GZ curve, the ship should loll to either side, in practice she would have a slight preference to one side slightly off-centre G, wind direction, etc. Having lolled over to one side a further heeling moment in that direction will be met by a righting lever which rises to a maximum and then tailsoff to the angle of vanishing stability. The same is not true in the reverse direction if from anangle of loll a moment is applied to bring the ship upright, this will initially be met with a moment trying to restore the angle of loll. A point is reached before she becomes upright wherethis restoring moment reaches a maximum and th e ship will then lurch through the upright and over to the angle of loll on the other side plus a further heel angle brought about by the moment which has been applied. When a ship is in a state of loll, her GZ curve will have becomerelatively flat, and conse quently the effects of this additional moment could be ca tastrophic. Loll is a very dangerous situation and to be avoided at all costs and if encountered reacted to rapidly. The method for calculating the GZ curve for a mo re general movement of weight in both a horizontal and vertical dir ection is given at Para 3130.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-19 Change 13127. Causes of and Reactions to List and Loll a. List is caused by an upsetting moment which causes a heeling moment, such as 1 An off centre weight.2 Any other external force causing an upsetting moment. b. In order to correct an angle of list 1 Remove the off centre weight or moment.2 Counter balance the off centre weight or moment with an equal and opposite one. c. A state of loll is caused by a high centre of gravity. This may be due to one of three causes 1 Excessive weight high up, eg flood water in the supe rstructure, unusual loading. 2 Insufficient weight low down, eg fuel, other liquids run down too far. 3 Free surface effects. d. The correct response is to take measures to 1 Reduce topweight.2 Increase weight low down.3 Reduce free surface effects. 3128. Longitudinal Stability The mechanics invol ved in longitudinal stability are fundamentally the same as for transverse stability. However there are se veral differences which should be noted a. The second moment of area of the waterplane is far greater longitudinally than transversely. Consequently the height of the longitudinal metacentre is far greater thanthe transverse metacentre in f act approximately 100 times as large. b. Unlike the transverse case, where the sh ip is symmetrical about the middle line, there is no axis of symmetry longitudinally and it is necessary to take account of the longitudinal position of the Centre of Flotation, LCF. c. Angles of trim are generally much smaller than those of heel therefore trim is normally described in te rms of the difference between the draughts at the perpendiculars and measured in metres.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-20 UK RESTRICTEDIn looking at the longitudinal stability of a shi p, the main concern is in controlling trim because although the ship is extremely stiff longitudina lly, it is exposed to much greater moments, due to the large lever arms, when transferring weights fore and aft rather than athwartships. As aconsequence of the longitudinal metacentric height being so large the effect of verticalmovements of the centre of gravity are insignificant, therefore allowing the assumption that itis constant at each draught. By considering the balance of righting moment and tr imming moment in the longitudinal case a simplified formula can be found giving the trimming moment required to cause a change of trim of 1m be tween the perpendiculars BP, such that Moment to Change Trim 1m BP GM 1 g681 LBPg230 g232g231g246 g248g247 Note. The accepted convention is to calcul ate Change of Trim in centimetres so g47 g47 g47 Moment to Change Trim 1cm BP D x GM 100 x LL BP This formula, therefore, provides a simple solution comparable to that for TPC for parallel sinkage. The Moment to Change Trim 1cm BP MCT1cmBP is dependent wholly on the g47 draught of the ship and is provided in the ships hydrostatic data. Now given a moment causing the ship to trim the change in trim of the sh ip between the perpendiculars can be found as g47 Change in Trim BP trimming moment MCT cmBP 1 Having found the trim change between the perpe ndiculars the rule of similar triangles can be applied to find the trim change caused at any point along the ships length by Change in Trim Change in Trim BP x Distance from LCF LBPg230 g232g231g246 g248g247 This is particularly useful for calculating the new draught extreme at the propellers for example, or predicting draught mark values. The method for calculating the change in trim at any point along the ship is given at Para 3133. 3129. Stability Methods The following give clear logical methods for solving common stability problems using the information available to the ship. 3130. Addition of Weight a nd Daily Stability Assessment In order to assess the stability of the ship on a daily basis or after changing the loading condition, thus providing a valid datum point prior to further inci dents, it is necessary to find GM and for the actual loading condition.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-21 Change 1a. Compare actual loading state tank states, stores, aircraft etc with a standard loading condition or known datum point. For this example assume that a weight w1 has been added Kg1 above the keel, a weight w2 has been removed Kg2 above the keel and a weight w3 has been moved vertically upwards a distance d3, compared to the Deep condition. b. Calculate the actual displacement g68g681 w - wDeep 1 2 c. Find the parallel sinkage cause d by the additional weight s w - w TPC12 Deep d. Find the actual draught for 1 T T s 1001Deep e. Find the metacentre from the hydrostatic data at this draught T1 KM1 f. Calculate the actual position of G KG1 KG x Kg x w - Kg x w d x w w - wDeep Deep 1 1 2 2 3 3 Deep 1 2g68 g68 g. Calculate the metacentric height G1M1 KM1 - KG1 3131. Addition of Liquids In order to assess the effect of adding a li quid to a ship currently floating at draught T with a centre of gravity KG, both the effect of the added weight and the effect of any free surfacemust be taken into account a. Find the total weight added w volume x density b. From hydrostatic data find and TPC at the original draught T.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-22 UK RESTRICTEDc. Find the parallel sinkage s w TPC d. Find the new draught T T s 1001 e. At the new draught T1 find KM1 from the hydrostatic data. f. Calculate the movement of the centre of gravity due to the addition of weight KG1 KG x Kg x w wg68 g68 g. Calculate the metacentric height after the weight is added GMsolid KM1 - KG1 h. Take account of the free surface effects reducing the metacentr ic height assuming a rectangular compartment length a, breadth b and the seawater in it of standard density Loss of GM ab x 1.025 12 x 3 g68 i. Calculate the effective metacentric height GMfluid GMsolid - Loss of GM 3132. Adjusting the GZ Curve for Movements of Weight To find the effect on the stability of the ship over the whole range of heel angles due to a large movement of weight, w, and to determine whether the ship is suffering from list or lollthe following method should be used to adjust the GZ curve a. Resolve the movement of weight compared to a standard loading condition into horizontal d horz and vertical dvert movements. b. Find the movement of G in a vertical direction GG1 w x dvert g68UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-23 Change 1c. Find the movement of G1 in a horizontal direction GG12 w x dhorz g68 d. Select suitable increments from the original GZ curve eg 10 and find values for GZ at each of these angles. e. Calculate the values of GG1sin and G1G2cos at each of the sel ected angles above. f. Subtract GG1sin and G1G2cos from the original values of GZ at each selected angle of heel to give a value for G2Z2 G2Z2 GZ - GG1sin - G1G2cos g. Replot the curve for G2Z2 against angle of heel. 3133. Change in Trim Due to Move ment of Weight Longitudinally To find the change in trim at any point along the ship due to a movement of weight longitudinally a. Find LCF and MCT1cmBP from the hydrostatic data for the mean draught of the g47 ship. b. Calculate the trimming moment, the distance the weight has moved multiplied by its weight if the weight has been added this is the distance from the LCF. c. Calculate the change in trim between perpendiculars g47 trim change BP trimming moment MCT cmBP 1 d. Calculate the trim change at any point trim change trim change BP x distance from LCF LBPBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 31-24 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-1 OriginalCHAPTER 32 STABILITY OF THE DAMAGED SHIP CONTENTS Para Estimating Stability after Damage ....................................... 3203 Permeability ........................................................ 3204 T h e A d d e d W e i g h t M e t h o d ............................................ 3205 T h e L o s t B u o y a n c y M e t h o d............................................ 3206 S i n k a g e............................................................ 3207 H e e l .............................................................. 3208 T r i m .............................................................. 3209 C a r p e t P l o t s ........................................................ 3212BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-3 OriginalCHAPTER 32 STABILITY OF THE DAMAGED SHIP 3201. Complete assessment of a ships overall stability after damage involves very complicated mathematical calculations, which take a lot of time and are therefore impractical during theimmediate period after an incident. The sh ips NBCD Class Book provides a number of examples for typical damage which can be consulted to give a quick and sure answer in thesecircumstances. However, in pr actice the actual extent of dama ge is unlikely to conveniently match one of these examples exactly and so a knowledge of how to predict the stability of the ship in situations other than those provided is necessary. 3502. The paragraphs that follow are intended to provide the background knowledge required to carry out calculations to predict stability after damage. It should be remembered that completing these calculations accurately is a lengthy process and requires a large amount of concentration and this should be taken into account befo re attempting to start them in the noisy environment of HQ1 at State 1. In order to reduce the time required to carry out thesecalculations and to provide quicker indications of the state of the ships stability, carpet plots areoften provided with the ships stability information and these are discussed at the end of thechapter. 3203. Estimating Stability after Damage a. When a ship is damaged to the extent that some length of her is open to the sea, and as far as watertight bulkheads permit, she is flooded to the waterline, there will be resulting sinkage and probably trim and heel. Chapter 31 explained how to carry outsome useful calculations for the effects of modest loadings on heel and trim. This islargely possible because under normal loadings the changes in heel and trim can often be assumed to be small and 1 Hydrostatics can be assu med unchanged through small angles of heel or trim. 2 Cross-coupling effects on hydrostatics between heel and trim can be ignored. When extensive flooding occurs in a ship the effects are often so substantial that these assumptions would give a false analysis. b. There are two methods by which damage stability ma y be calculated 1 The added weight method.2 The lost buoyancy method.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-4 UK RESTRICTEDThe first method is the more simple and logical method and draws very much on the principles discussed in Chapter 31. The flood water is treated as an added weight and any free surface effects taken account of by an effective reduction in GM. This method is particularly useful for compartments be low the waterline which will free flood and present only small free surface effects. The pr oblem with this method is that it involves a lot of iteration if the compartment is large and cuts the waterline of the ship, becausethe level of water in the compartment will only rise to the waterline and as it does theship will sink further until an equilibrium is reached. In these ci rcumstances the second method which relies on calculating the loss of buoyancy due to the flood provides a better answer, however, it is a lengthy calculation. 3204. Permeability If a compartment is filled with water and an attempt to es timate the weight of water within it is made, an allowance must be made for the volume of the compartment that is occupiedby such things as fittings, equipment, stores and machinery. This allowance is called thepermeability of the compartment as is expressed as a percentage of the gross volume of thecompartment. The exact value of permeability will obviously change from compartment to compartment and from day to day and therefor e a good approximation is required in order to carry out damage stability calculations. The following figures are given as a guide andadjustments should be made ba sed on ships knowledge, experience and loading conditions Watertight compartments 97 Accommodation Spaces 95Machinery Spaces 85Stores 60 3205. The Added Weight Method The added weight method is the simplest to understand but ca n be quite lengthy, particularly if the flood is large, because of the iterations require d. It is fundamentally the same as the methods described in Chapter 31 for addi ng a liquid weight to the ship and involves a parallel sinkage and adjustment to the centre of gravity and metacentre and then an allowance for free surface effects. The method is as follo ws, refer to Chapter 31 for further explanation. a. Estimate the volume of water in the compartment to the waterline. An allowance should be made for permeability the percen tage of the compartment not occupied by fittings, equipments, stores, etc. For this the added weight of fl ood water can be estimated. b. Knowing the added weight calculate the parallel sinkage, usin g TPC for hydrostatic data at the original draught. c. From the new draught a second iteration can then be made of the weight of flood water up to this level it will be more than the first iteration, and again the parallelsinkage calculated and the new draught found.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-5 Originald. At this new draught find the position of the metacentre KM1 from the hydrostatic data and calculate the new positi on of the centre of gravity KG1. e. The metacentric height can then be cal culated as if the flood water was a solid weight GM KM1 - KG1 f. Now make an adjustment to the GM for any free surface effects, assuming the compartment is rectangular g40 g41GMfluid G M -ab x 1.025 12 x 3 g68 g. It is quite possible under severe cases of damage that the GM will become negative and the ship will loll. Because the ship side is free flooding, as the ship rolls there islikely to be a change in the weight of flood water and so further iterations will be required. Ultimately an accurate result can be obtained by this method. In spite of the tedium of the iterations required it has its merit in that at each iteration an accurate assessment of the changingweight of flood water can be made , in particular allowing for watertight decks overhead which may be able to restri ct flooding vertically. 3206. The Lost Buoyancy Method a. The alternative approach is to consider that as a result of damage the volume of the hull and area of the waterplane which contribute to the buoyan cy and hydrostatics of the ship have been modified. The method i nvolves transferring the buoyancy previously provided by the new flooded compartment to a new layer of buoyancy above the original waterline and reducing the waterplane area. These have the effects of 1 Altering transverse and longitudinal GMs. 2 Sinking the ship lower in the water.3 Heeling the ship.4 Trimming the ship. b. The analysis of the results of damage can be calculated in three distinct stages 1 Estimate sinkage.2 Estimate damaged transv erse metacentre and heel. 3 Estimate damaged longit udinal metacentre and trim.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-6 UK RESTRICTED3207. Sinkage a. As with the added weight method, first an estimate of the weight of flood water must be made, this is also the loss of buoyan cy w, also the position and the size of the compartment must be estimated. b. Estimate the area of the waterplane lost by assuming the compartment is a rectangle length a, breadth b Lost WPA a x b c. Find the remaining TPC from the formula which transforms the lost WPA to a weight of sea water 1cm thick Re maining TPC TPC - lost WPA 97.5 d. Calculate the parallel sinkage s in cm s w remaining TPC 3208. Heel a. Estimate the shift of the centre of flotation off the centreline caused by the loss of waterplane area FF1 a x fF A - a where A original WPA TPC x 97.5 a lost WPA a x bfF distance from the centreline of the middle of the flooded compartment. b. Calculate the second moment of area of th e lost waterplane area from the fore and aft axis through the new centre of flotati on. For a rectangular compartment length a, breadth b a distance d from the new centre of flotations axis g40 g41i a x b x d a x b 1223UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-7 Change 1c. Find the fall in the transverse metacentre MT due to the lost waterplane area Fall of MT i x g114 g68 d. Find the rise of the centre of buoy ancy due to the parallel sinkage Rise of B w x Bb g68 where Bb distance from the orig inal centre of buoyancy found from hydrostatic data to the centre of the parallel sinkage s 200T g230 g232g231g246 g248g247 e. The centre of gravity is unchanged so the transverse metacentric height is only changed by the fall in metacentre and rise in centre of buoyancy GMTdamaged GMoriginal - fall of MT rise of B f. The angle of heel can now be found. The heeling moment is given by the loss of buoyancy, w, multiplied by the distance from the centre of the lost waterplane area to the fore and after axis of the centre of flotation g40 g41tan heeling moment x GMTg102g68 damaged 3209. Trim Calculation of trim is similar to calculation of heel a. Estimate the fore or aft shift of the centre of flotation due to the lost waterplane area Para 3208a. b. Calculate the loss of second moment of area of the waterplane where the centre of the compartment is a distance, e, from the athwartships axis through the new centre offlotation. The formula in Para 3208b becomes g40 g41i a x b x e b x a 12 23 c. Find the fall in longitudinal metacentre due to the loss of waterplane area Fall of M i x Lg114 g68BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-8 UK RESTRICTEDd. The rise in centre of buoyancy due to parallel sinkage is the same as in the transverse case therefore GMLdamaged GMoriginal - fall of ML rise of B where GML original can be found from g47 GML original MCT1cmBP x L original BP g68 e. Now the MCT1cmBP for the damaged ship can be calculated g47 g47 MCT cmBPdamaged 1 x GM LL damaged BPg68 f. The trimming moment is found by multiplying the lost buoyancy by the longitudinal distance between the centre of the flooded co mpartment and the new centre of flotation. Therefore g47 Change in Trim trimming moment MCT1cmBPdamaged 3210. Both of these methods will allow predicti on of ship stability with reasonable accuracy up to approximately 15 of heel. At greater angles of heel or at large angles of trim, particularly if the deck edge is immersed or large areas of weather deck are submerged forward or aft,improvement of stability must be of prime importance and refe rence should be made to the damage examples given in the NBCD Class Book. 3211. As can be seen above both of these methods are extremely long and tedious and fraught with the risk of calculation errors particularly during the stress of State 1. Therefore everyattempt should be made by the officers responsible to fully fa miliarise themselves with the examples in the NBCD Class B ook and attain a suita ble level of ships stability knowledge to recognise when an incident may start to pres ent a stability problem and should be studied more closely. 3212. Carpet Plots To make the task of assessing the effect of flooding on ships stability very much quicker and less likely to create an error, Carpet Plots are often issued to ships to aid the HQ1 team.These plots provide a quick visual guide to the state of the ships stability dependent on thelength of the flood. With reference to Fig 32- 1, carpet plots are used in the following mannerUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-9 Original Fig 32-1. Carpet Plot a. The longitudinal extent of the flooding is marked on the diagram of the ship see shaded area. b. A line 1 is drawn vertically down fro m the fore most boundary of the flood until it reaches the right hand diagonal ab of the plot. c. A horizontal line 2 is plotted from this intersection with the diagonal.d. A vertical line 3 is drawn down from the after most boundary of the flood.e. The stability of the ship is shown by the region in which the horizontal plotted line intersects with the after vertical line.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 32-10 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-1 Change 1CHAPTER 33 DOCKING AND GROUNDING CONTENTS Para D o c k i n g ........................................................... 3304 F l o t a t i o n D u r i n g D o c k i n g ............................................. 3305 M a g n i t u d e o f R e a c t i o n w h e n a V e s s e l S u e s A l l A l o n g t h e B l o c k s .............. 3305 Transverse Stability During Dockin g..................................... 3306 Grounding ......................................................... 3307 Analysis for Grounding On the Centreline ................................ 3308 Grounding Countermeasures ........................................... 3309 g47 Transverse Stability after Grounding On the Centreline ...................... 3310 g47 Grounding Off the Centreline .......................................... 3311 g47 Transverse Stability after Grounding Off the Centreline ...................... 3312 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-3 Change 1 CHAPTER 33 DOCKING AND GROUNDING 3301. A ship may be docked for nor mal maintenance or for repa ir work and may be grounded by accident or to prevent her total loss after damage. The stability problems associated with either of these situations are similar except that docking is a more controlled evolution with thehands on experience of a Dockmaster to ensure the necessary precautions are taken. 3302. This chapter examines the forces develope d during docking or grounding and discusses the impact these can have on the stability of the ship. 3303. Grounding and docking introduce an external force, the reaction between the floating body and the block or ground, cons equentially buoyancy will not e qual weight. The hydrostatic data for the positions of LCF, centre of buoyancy and the metacentres w ill all remain appropriate for the draught of the ship. However, the weight of the ship will not be equal to the massdisplacement given for that draught in the hydrosta tic data, rather this fi gure will represent the buoyancy force and to find the weight of the ship the reaction force has to be added to it. Since the body will be in equilibrium under 3 forces, weight, buoyancy and the reaction buoyancy and weight will not necessarily act in the same straight line - B will not necessarily be under G. 3304. Docking During the docking procedure, as the water level in the dock falls, it can be difficult to keep the position of the ship accurately above the dock blocks she will rest on, especially if there is any wind. To minimise the risk of docking sk ew to the blocks, with consequential problems for the stability of the blocks and indeed the ship, and the possibility of excessive forces beingproduced, the normal practice is first to concentrat e on centring one end of the keel on the blocks. Then, as the water level falls, the weight taken anchors that point and closer attention can be given to the other end. Most ships are designed to trim by the stern and the after cut up ACU is made of sufficient width and strength to take the normal docking loads without undue damage to dock blocks. Hence it is usual before docking to arrange the draughts so that the ship is trimmed by the stern to ensure the after cut up sues first. 3305. Flotation During Docking Assuming that the vessel is trimming by the stern relative to the blocks so that it sues first at the after cut up. Fig 33-1. Afloat in DockBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-4 UK RESTRICTED Until the keel touches aft the situation will be normal, ie buoyancy weight, as in Fig 33-1. Once the keel touches and the water in the dock falls relative to the ship, a force P will becreated. Being aft of the LCF, P will cause the ship to trim forward, thus moving B forward toregain equilibrium as shown in Fig 33-2. Fig 33-2. Keel Touching the Dock Blocks The conditions of equilibrium are now a. Weight buoyancy reaction P.b. The moment of the three forces about any axis is zero. If the ship is symmetrical and remains upright, the three forces will lie in the centre plane of the ship and only the longitudinal moments need to be considered. As a result of the trimming effectof the force P, the ship will eventually touch the dock blocks all along. Thereafter the reaction force will be distributed along the length of the keel and further considerations of the combinedmoments of the forces should become academic. 3305. Magnitude of Reaction when a Vessel Sues All Along the Blocks The reaction force, P, will reach its maximum ju st prior to the keel touching all the way along its length. At this time the blocks and the keel structure at the after cut up must be capableof withstanding this force without crushing or tripping. Apart from structural concerns the magnitude of P at this time is also important for transverse stability. As P increases, draught reduces, the LCF will, in general, change pos ition and MCT will change, though for small initial trims the effect of their change can be ignored. Thus, a first estimate of P is made as Pj trim change required to align keel with blocks x MCT1cmBP g47 where j is the separation of the ACU from CF trim change required trim by st ern - declivity of dock blocks g47 g40 g41P trim change required to align keel with blocks x MCT1cmBP jUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-5 Original The resulting draught reduction at LCF will be PTPC. This will provide a new mean draughtfrom which new hydrostatic data for the pos ition of LCF, TPC and MCT 1m can be found. Using these new figures a second iteration of the above calculations can be made to find a more accurate answer for P. Note. Most Naval Dockyards no longer have any dock block declivity, however this maybe experienced in some areas of the world. 3306. Transverse Stabilit y During Docking The introduction of a force p at the keel reduces the righting moment generated when the ship is disturbed from the upright condition. From Fig 33-3 it can be seen that by taking moments about the keel K the net righting mome nt allowing for the effects of the reaction force P is g40 g41 g40 g41 g40 g41Righting M KM o m e n t - P - .K G s i n .KM - .KG - P.KM .GM - P.KM GM - KM.Pg61 g61 g61g230 g232g231g246 g248g247g68g68 g68g68 g68 g68 g68sin sin sin sing102g102 g102 g102 g102 This parallels the normal afloat relationship righting couple GMsin, and so the expression GM - KM.P is sometimes referred to as the effective GM. However it must be remembered that the GM in this expression changes as the ship sues because as the water level falls away from the ship the position of M will move. Fig 33-3. Transverse Stability During DockingBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-6 UK RESTRICTEDThe ship will remain stable so long as KM.P GM. It will be seen that this condition will be threatened if either GM is low, or if the reaction force P is high. As we have seen the magnitudeof P is determined by the trim change required to align the keel with the blocks, the distance ofthe point the keel first touches usually the ACU from the LCF, and the ship MCT 1m at thedocking draught. Assuming MCT 1m is outside control, to minimise the risk of instability duringsuing, the following conditions should be sought a. Maximum GM practical this may sometimes demand ballasting, and may be stipulated in the Stability Statement. As usual, free surfaces must be kept to aminimum. b. The change in trim required to sue all along should be the minimum consistent with the requirements for the docking proce dure no more than about 0.6m should be necessary. There may however be occasions when in a light condition the ship has a very large trim, in which case ballasting may be necessary to reduce P - not just forstability but also to protect the dock blocks. c. The point at which the ship first touche s should be as far as possible from the LCF. Although the LCF is usually abaft midships for surface warships, and the ACU is well forward of the stern, as stated above it is normal to use the ACU for this purpose rather than the forefoot as it presents less problems when strengthening the local structure inthis area. 3307. Grounding With the exception of the special cases of docking or amphibious landings, grounding is a condition to be avoided in ships such as warships which are not designed with grounding in view. Ships so designed have flat bottoms and ground on mud or soft sand which equalises the bearing pressures. Analysis of the reaction fo rce apparent after grounding requires the following information a. The point at which the ship has grounded.b. The state of the tide relative to that at which the ship grounded 1 If the tide rises the vessel will be able to float off providing there has been no increase of weight and no flooding has resulted from the grounding. 2 If the tide falls the reaction between ship and ground will increase. The additional upward force will reduce th e buoyancy and hence the volume of displacement. For equilibrium the centr e of buoyancy will move away from the point of grounding - as in docking - and the vessel will take up a heel or trim away from the point of grounding to accomplish this. The condition to apply is that the reduction in draught at the point of grounding due to the parallel rise, the change in trim, and effects of heel, must be equal to the fall in tide. There aretwo situations of grounding which are best exa mined separately centreline grounding when heel effects can be ignored and grounding off the centre line when all three effects must be considered.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-7 Change 1 3308. Analysis for Grounding On the Centreline Fig 33-4. Grounding On the Centreline Referring to Fig 33-4, with no heeling moment Let s parallel rise h the fall in tidej the distance from the CF of the point of groundingt the change in trim between perpendiculars caused by the moment of the grounding force P then, the reaction force P will cause parallel sinkage s given by g47 s P TPC in cm and the change in trim caused by the reaction force P will be g47 t P x j MCT1cmBP in cm j and MCT 1cm being the respective figures fo r the waterline after parallel rise s WL1 g47 The effect of parallel rise and trim at the point of grounding must equal the fall in tide. Hence h s t x j LBPg230 g232g231g246 g248g247 These 3 equations can now be solved to give P. Note that an improvement in accuracy can be made by using the TPC and position of LCF between WL0 and WL1, but it should be appreciated that when a ship is grounded, precise calculations will rarely be necessary.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-8 UK RESTRICTED 3309. Grounding Countermeasures g47 In considering countermeasures to grounding, the moment of P x j Fig 33-4 gives an g47 indication of the moment required by g47 g47 a. Counterflooding. g47 g47 b. The removal of weights from the grounded end. g47 g47 c. The transfer of weights to the free end. g47 g47 While counterflooding may have the advantage of being the qui ckest of the three methods, it will g47 incur an element of parallel sinkage and in practice there is a limit to the number of tanks g47 available for this purpose. The removal of weights from the area of impact will reduce pounding g47 at this point, thereby limiting the degree of structural damage, and the transfer of liquid and solid g47 weight to the free end, if sufficiently large, will trim the ship to the point where it can be pulled g47 free. In most ships the limited capacity for each of these procedures may necessitate a g47 combination of all three to be effective. The removal and transfer of solid weights and liquids, g47 combined with counterflooding may be insuffi cient to release the ship. Therefore early g47 consideration should be given to the flooding of other compartments in a ddition to tanks and void g47 spaces. g47 3310. Transverse Stability after Grounding On the Centreline g47 It will be evident that if grounding occurs to wards either end the point of contact will be approximately on the middle line. Under these circumstances transverse stability will be affectedsimilarly to stability after docking, such that the ship has an effective GM Effective GM GM - KM x P 3311. Grounding Off the Centreline g47 Grounding away from the centreline presents more problems as the reaction force will also result in the ship heeling. Fig 33-5. Grounding Off the CentrelineUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-9 Change 1With reference to Fig 33-5, if the grounding for ce P acts a distance k off the centreline, it will cause a heeling moment P x kcos which will be resisted by the righting moment x GM - PKMsin. For equilibrium g40 g41 g40 g41 g40 g41 g40 g41Pk KM KMcos sin tang102g102g102 G M - P Pk GM - P g68g68 g68g68 The result of the angle of heel is to cause th e draught at the point of grounding to fall by an amount, say f so tan f k It can be said that g40 g41 g40 g41f KM Pk GM - P 2 g68g68 Hence it can be seen that the effect of an upward force P at any point will cause the draught to decrease at that point by an am ount due to parallel sinkage, an amount due to trim, and an amount due to heel. A first approximation to that total, which will equal the fall in tide, will followingthe earlier analysis be g47 g40g41 g40g41 g40g41h KM P 100TPC Pj MCT1cmBP L Pk GM - P 2 BP2 g68g68 3312. Transverse Stability after Grounding Off the Centreline g47 Assessment of the transverse stability of a ship grounding off the centreline is somewhat more difficult than before. Essentially, the ri ghting moment itself is the same as for the centreline grounding case but the ship has already adopted an angle of heel due to the grounding reaction force and any additional movement of weight will act a bout this angle not the upright. It is important to note that this analysis of stability after grounding relies on small angle theory and angles of heel due to off centreline grounding will quickly exceed 10 so that this theory is invalid. This situation is exceptionally dangerous and difficult to predict, particularly if the rangeof tide experience is high, resulting in angles of heel approaching the angle of downtakeimmersion. Earlier advice to increase GM, so in creasing the ships stability, by ballasting low in the ship still holds except that obviously ballasting on the centreline will in this case increasethe angle of heel, this problem could be eased by ballasting low in the ship on the same side as the grounding point.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 33-10 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 34-1 Change 1CHAPTER 34 DAMAGE CONTROL AND FIREFIGHTING STORES CONTENTS Para S t o w a g e ........................................................... 3403 C u s t o d y ........................................................... 3404 M a r k i n g ........................................................... 3405 E x p l o s i v e s a n d P y r o t e c h n i c s f o r N B C D .................................. 3406 A r r a n g e m e n t s i n W a r................................................. 3407 A c c e s s t o E q u i p m e n t L o c k e r s a t F i r e a n d R e p a i r P o s t s....................... 3408 F R P P L o c k e r C o n t e n t s a n d C o n t e n t s L i s t s ................................ 3409 D e f e c t i v e N B C D E q u i p m e n t ........................................... 3410 g47BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 34-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 34-3 OriginalCHAPTER 34 DAMAGE CONTROL AND FIREFIGHTING STORES 3401. The majority of damage repair stores are supplied initially as either permanent or consumable naval stores, with some supplied as armament stores, eg charges for the Ramset explosive-powered fastening tool. A guide to th e allowances for ships is given in BR 21703 - Catalogue of NBCD Stores for Surface Ships and RFAs, and for submarines in BR 21704 - Ship NBCD Manual Submarines. 3402. Generally, stores used for damage repair consist of the following a. Materials for shoring and the necessary tools for cutting and setting up shores.b. Leakstopping materials such as wedges, splinter boxes, patches and patch packs for the prevention of flooding through sp linter holes and damaged structure. c. Equipment and tools for effecting pipe repairs, and the Ramset explosive-powered tool for light struct ural repairs, etc. d. Electrical equipment such as floodlights, la mps, fuses, etc, for effecting emergency repairs to the electrical system and for supplying light and pow er to areas being repaired. e. Equipment for wreckage clearance such as heavy and portable cutting apparatus and lifting gear. f. Portable lighting such as torches, caplamps, battery operated floodlights and Cyalume chemical illuminators which, when needed, provide emergency lighting fordamage control and fi rst aid parties, etc. 3403. Stowage In most ships much of the different equipm ent required for damage repair is contained in built-in lockers sited at each Fire and Repair Party Post. Ma terial such as shoring timber, softwood planks, adjustable steel shores, etc, which are too large to fit in the stowages should be distributed throughout the ship, with particul ar attention being gi ven to accessibility under possible damage conditions. Damage repair stores should not be stowed so low in the ship as to be inaccessible should the compartment be flooded. 3404. Custody It is not easy to ensure the safe custody of equipment in open stowages throughout the ship, but the loss of damage repair or fi refighting equipment mig ht have very serious consequences in an emergency. The responsib ilities of officers in regard to NBCD equipment are given in Chapter 2, and as follows a. Damage repair stores are initially taken into account by the Supply Officer and the Armament Stores Accounting Officer for explosive items.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 34-4 UK RESTRICTEDb. Damage repair stores except explosive stores are to be issued to the MEONBCDO and placed around the ship as shown in the NBCD Class Book. The MEONBCDO isresponsible for ensuring that these stores are periodically mustered and kept in a sound, workable, condition. c. Firefighting stores, including breathing appa ratus, are to be issued to the MEO and placed around the ship in authorized stowages as shown in the NBCD Class Book. They should be marked as suggested in the following paragraph, and issued by the MEO tothe officers in whose departmental spaces they are normally stowed. Day-to-day careof the equipment is to be managed by the officer responsible for the particular space. The MEO is responsible for the periodical te sting, maintenance and replenishment, as necessary, of all the issued equipment in accordance with the relevant maintenanceschedules. d. The few stores items needed for the maintenance and upkeep of the damage repair and firefighting equipment should be st owed in the MEOs ready-use store. 3405. Marking A standard method of markin g all damage repair and fi refighting equipment should be used to establish ownership and responsibility , deter personnel from una uthorized removal or help in subsequent tracing and facilitate mustering and maintenance. Suitable identificationtallies can be made by ships staff and secured to all such portable equipment except hoses andnozzles. 3406. Explosives and Pyrotechnics for NBCD Explosives and pyrotechnics supplied for NBCD purposes are to be taken into account by the Armament Stores Accountin g Officer and stowed in the maga zines and stores as laid down in BR 862 - Naval Magazine and Ex plosives Regulations. They are to be issued to the MEO or the NBCD Officer when needed. 3407. Arrangements in War In peacetime much of the personal issue NBCD equipment is held in the Supply Officers stores. In war this will be issued to individuals as directed and arranged by the NBCDOfficer. The items then become the personal re sponsibility of the recipients, Divisional Officers being responsible for their periodi cal mustering, inspection and testing. In war, as in peace, medical stores for first aid pur poses are to be placed around the ship by the Medical Officer in the first aid stowages at quarters and first aid posts. The Medical Officer is responsible for their periodical mustering and turnover. 3408. Access to Equipment Lockers at Fire and Repair Posts Quick access to fire lockers in an emergenc y is ensured by the provision of a duplicate key in a glass-fronted key box secured to these lockers. The remaining keys of the fire lockersand damage control lockers are held in HQ1SCC for distribution when required. It is possible that a physical barrier, caused by smoke, fire or damage, might delay the delivery of keys from HQ1SCC to the fire and repair party post needin g them. Therefore, duplicate keys of damage control lockers are to be clearly tallied and placed in a small box or bag and stowed within the appropriate fire locker.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 34-5 Change 33409. FRPP Locker Contents and Contents Lists HM Ships excluding MMPP, submarines and RFAs are provided with standardized Fire and Repair Party Post lockers containing an allowance of NBCD stores in dedicated stowages. Large items are stowed near the lockers. These standard lockers are combined fordamage control, electrical repair and fire party stores. Dedicat ed M and L toolkits can be taken to the scene of an incident by mainta iners, enabling simple repairs without constant recourse to the tools in the FRPP locker. A lis t of standard locker contents and a diagram of locker layout is published in BR 21703. A copy, together with a list of the larger items stowed nearby should be displayed on the inside of th e locker doors. MMPPs and RFAs which are not provided with standard lockers ar e to retain the stores listed in Chapter 3 of BR 21703 and display a list of locker contents, and larger NB CD stores stowed nearby, on the inside of the locker doors. 3410. Defective NBCD Equipment Reports of defective material or design in NBCD equipment are to be forwarded on Form S.2022, in accordance with BR 1313 - Maintenance Ma nagement in Ships. The procedure for g47 reporting defective NBCD clothi ng is detailed in Chapter 26.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 34-6 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35-1 Change 2CHAPTER 35 NBCD ORDERS CONTENTS Para Introduction ........................................................ 3501 S h i p s G e n e r a l O r d e r s ................................................ 3502 S h i p s N B C D O r d e r s ................................................. 3503 ANNEXES Annex A Format for Chapter 15 of Ships General Orders Annex B Format for Ships NBCD OrdersBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35-3 Change 2CHAPTER 35 NBCD ORDERS 3501. Introduction This chapter specifies the recommended fo rmats for Ships NBCD Orders and the NBCD chapter of Ships General Orders. The form ats are to be adapted as necessary to reflect any special equipment, fittings, organisation or procedures in each individual ship. Cross references to the BR 2170 Series should refer to volume and chapter numbe rs only, not specific paragraph numbers. This will reduce the amendment task for Ships Staff as the BRs are regularly updated. 3502. Ships General Orders Basic NBCD forms Chapter 15 of Ships General Orders in accordance with FLAGO. The format, at Annex A to this Chapter, aims to avoid unnecessary duplication of the BR 2170 Series, although some overlap is necessary to ex plain the application of NBCD in basic terms. 3503. Ships NBCD Orders The format for Ships NBCD Orders is at Annex B to this Chapter. Duplication of generic information in the BR 2170 Series should be avoided in these Orde rs. The format should be followed where applicable to the ship, but vari ations or additions may be necessary to reflect non-standard equipment or manni ng eg ships without built-in collective protection or large numbers of embarked forces. 3504. The format gives only broad guidance for th e content of chapters the details for inclusion are to be completed by the individual Sh ips Staff. The layout of pages and paragraphs is to be similar to that used for Ships General Orders. Paragraph numbers are not specified in the format, to allow Ships Staff to locate, insert or delete paragraphs, as applicable to the ship. Check lists, standard operating pr ocedures, route cards, etc should be included as annexes to the related chapters, to facilitate duplication for usersoperators. 3505. The security classification of Ships NBCD Orders should be Restricted. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35A-1 Change 2ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 35 FORMAT FOR CHAPTER 15 OF SHIPS GENERAL ORDERS CHAPTER 15 Basic NBCD 1501. NBCD in HMSRFA ..... 1. A general statement on the relevance a nd importance of NBC Defence, including medical countermeasures. 2. A statement on how NBCD concerns all memb ers of the Ships Company and embarked personnel. 3. The requirement for all personnel to unde rtake NBCD tasks outside their normal specialist duties. 4. A brief explanation of the application of NB CD in the particular ship, highlighting any deviations from norma l RNRFA practice. 5. Cross references to Ships NBCD Orders, BR 2170, CB 4538 Series - NBCD Class Book, CB 9500 Series - Stability and Survivability Book and BR 875 for RFAs, as appropriate, stating the relationship of these Orders to each other. 1502. SHIP KNOWLEDGE 1. The importance of all personnel having a g ood ship knowledge to enable them to react to emergencies at sea or in harbour. 2. A summary of the ships NBCD facilitie s with which personne l must be familiar. 1503. NBCD ORGANISATION 1. An explanation of the day-to-day administation of NBCD matters, including the role of HQ1SCC andor Gangway Watchkeepers. 2. The roles of the SSEP and HFEP. 1504. FIRE AND FLOOD PREVENTION 1. Attention to correct working practices. 2. Cross reference to the welding and hot work orders in Chapter 2 of SGOs. 1505. ACTION TO BE TAKEN ON DISCOV ERING FIRE, FLOOD OR DAMAGE 1. Alarm procedure. 2. Actions to deal with the incident. BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35A-2 UK RESTRICTED1506. ACTION TO BE TAKEN ON HEARING A FIRE, FLOOD OR DAMAGE ALARM 1. Actions to be taken at the scene of the incident. 2. General instructions for the Ships Co mpany SSEP and HFEP actions in NBCDOs. 3. Touch drill only for LAFB call-out during exercises. 1507. EMERGENCY STATIONS 1. Instructions specific to NBCD parties. 2. Cross reference to Chapter 2 of SGOs for the general Emergency Stations and Liferaft Stations procedures. 1508. CLEARING AWAY AND SECURING FOR ACTION 1. Responsibility. 2. Actions.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35B-1 Change 2ANNEX B TO CHAPTER 35 FORMAT FOR SHIPS NBCD ORDERS Preliminary Pages Title page Introductory statement by the CO, highlightin g any special NBCD features of the ship, referring to the NBCD Class Book for sh ip-specific data and BR 2170 for generic information. Readers signature pages. Distribution list. Record of changes Contents list chapter headings Chapter 1 - Responsibilities Definition of the NBCD organisati on, with a family tree diagram. Responsibilities of the following personnel, if different from those detailed in BR 2170 The Command X O M E O W E O S O M O Flt Cdr P W O N O NBCDO if separate from XO Specialist post officers eg FDO, Assault Systems Officer Part of Ship Officers Divisional Officers Whole-ship NBCDQ Departmental NBCDQs OOW D C O N B C P O N B C P O A IC and 2IC FRP and Secti on Bases, where applicable Electrical Repair Parties Mobile Repair Party N B C D P a t r o l s OODDuty CO HQ1 Watchkeeper Gangway Watchkeepers BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35B-2 UK RESTRICTEDChapter 2 - Command, Control and Communications C2 organisation in States 1, 2 and 3 Defence watch NBCD manning Location and manning of HQ1, HQ2 Sec tion Bases in large ships, AHQ, FRPPs, WSB, AWSB, MRP, ERPs, MHQ, SMP and FAPs HQ1 and FRPP relocation plans NBCD information and display systems Definition of areas covered by each FRP Embarked personnel Air Gr oups, Military Forces, etc Dispersal of personnel at State1 Blanket search procedur es routes as annexes NBCD patrol routes annexes Aides memoire for key personnel annexes Availability of the NBCD Class Book in HQ1 SSEP organisation HFEP organisations in Na val Base or other ports Details of all communications systems used for NBCD Allocation of channels fo r DCFF radio communications Chapter 3 - States and Conditions Responsibility for ordering changes to the NBCD State Mandatory changes of State State 1 preparations check list in annex Dispersal of personnel at State 2 and other State 2 responses to the threat Ordering and control of the NBCD Condition Watertight Integrity Log Allocation of MBLO discs X, Y and Z closing down check lists annexes Chapter 4 - Damage Control and Stability Zoning arrangements Flood warning systems SOPs for flood alarms annexes Location of DC equipment not in FRPP lockers Emergency pumping arrangements Arrangements for draining down floodwater Ballastcounterflooding arra ngements and procedures Jettison Bill list in annex Emergency electrical supply arrangements Chapter 5 - Firefighting Action to be taken by the SSEP or HFEP on hearing a fire alarm Fire warning systems Fixed firefighting systems HPSW system instructionsUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35B-3 Change 2 Extent of fire barrier insulation eg A60 bulkheads Areas of special fire risk eg alumin ium structure, non-standard materials SOPs for specific fires in annexes SOPs for containment in annexes SOPs for flight deck emergencies in annex SOP for ventilation control Smoke clearance plans Location of TMS temperature monitoring points MMS re-entry briefs annexes Firefighting aides memoire for key pers onnel at sea and in harbour annexes Arrangements and procedures for LAFB assistance Location of BADCFF and escape BA annexes Identification systems for FF equi pment, BA, FF communications, etc Custody and maintenance of firefighting equipment Chapter 6 - NBC Defence Collective protection arrangements in citadel ships UCPS or sanctuary arrangem ents in non-citadel ships Check lists for assuming Condition Alfa annex Relaxation of Condition Alfa Habitability arrangements in Condition Alfa Citadel entry and exit, including instructions for sentries Cleansing station arrangements Aircrew and Embarked Military Forces entryexit procedures Access tofrom machinery spaces Action in the event of a citadel breach Shelter stations, pa rties and routes Location and contents check list for cleansing lockers Custody of NBC equipment NBC detection systems Prewetting arrangements and procedures Monitoring routes and reporting method route cards in annex Decontamination routes annex BRACISATP45 warning reporting application in the particular ship Allocation of personal dosimeters Allocation of personal che mical detection equipment NBC medical countermeasures Orders for the removal of facial hair Annual respirator testing BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 35B-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-1 Change 1CHAPTER 36 INSPECTIONS, TESTS AND TRIALS CONTENTS Para M i n i s t r y o f D e f e n c e I n s p e c t i o n s ........................................ 3603 C i t a d e l T e s t s........................................................ 3610 T y p e s o f C i t a d e l T e s t ................................................. 3612 V a c u u m T e s t ....................................................... 3613 P r e s s u r e T e s t ....................................................... 3614 I n s t r u m e n t a t i o n f o r T e s t i n g ............................................ 3615 Harbour Acceptan ce Trial Citadel ...................................... 3616 Sea Acceptance Trial Citadel ......................................... 3617 F i r e f i g h t i n g E q u i p m e n t I n s p e c t i o n s...................................... 3619 D a m a g e C o n t r o l E q u i p m e n t I n s p e c t i o n s .................................. 3623 F i r e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t i o n............................................... 3627 Harbour Acceptance Trial NBCD ...................................... 3631 Prewetting - Sea Acceptance Trial ....................................... 3636 ANNEXES g45 g45 Annex A HATNBCD Pre-SSMOB Checks g45 Annex B HATNBCD Pre-RFSD Checks g45 Annex C HATNBCD Pre-FDI Checks g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-3 Change 2CHAPTER 36 INSPECTIONS, TESTS AND TRIALS 3601. The implementation of good NBCD practi ce depends largely upon the efficiency of watertight structure, doors, hatche s and fittings and NBCD equipment. To ensure this efficiency, numerous inspections, trials and tests and conscientious maintena nce must be carried out. For most items, the necessary procedures and their pe riodicity are clearly set out in the appropriate maintenance schedule to which re ference must always be made. 3602. During the construction of a warship, wate rtight compartments are detailed in the tabular statement of watertight compartments , a document which forms part of the ships drawings. The compartments listed are water-pressure tested before the ship is launched andmeasures taken, if necessary, to provide add itional stiffening and to make good any leaks discovered. Once a ship is in service, wate rtight compartments are given periodic visual inspections which will indicate obvious threats to watertight integrity. Reference must be made to BR 20006 - Naval Marine Engineering Prac tices Hull, should it be necessary to water- pressure test any compartment of a ship in commission. The only compartments likely to require such testing are those that normally contain fu el and which have been subjected to repairs affecting their integrity. 3603. Ministry of Defence Inspections Inspections of NBCD material arrangements are carried out in all new construction ships. The inspections are made by the platform Integrated Project Team IPT. Associated with the g45 inspections are representatives of the Resident Project Officer RPO and the appropriate shipsofficers. These inspections are included in the programme of inspections and trials prior tocompletion of the ship. 3604. In MMPP and larger ships two such inspections are held a.Preliminary. Carried out when work on the NB CD arrangements is approximately sixty per cent complete. This inspection is mainly to provide guidance on theapplication of all the relevant drawings and specifications before the work is too far advanced. b.Final. Carried out when work on the arrangement is at least ninety per cent complete, with all the equipment in place in the ship and fully operational otherwise itis impracticable for the inspecting officers to carry out a proper check. 3605. The principal arrangements to be covered by the inspections are a. The layout and equipment of HQ1 and HQ2, if applicable. b. The layout and equipment of Section Bases in large ships or of Fire and Repair Party Posts in small ships. c. NBCD equipment, materials and stores.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-4 UK RESTRICTEDd. Firefighting arrangements generally. This is in addition to the trials and inspections referred to in BR 1921 - Procedure for the Supervision of Ships and Vessels Building by Contract. e. NBC storerooms, cleansing stations and arrangements fo r decontamination. f. NBCD markings.g. Citadel arrangements.h. Ventilation arrangements. 3606-3609. Spare. 3610. Citadel Tests To exclude contamination, it is necessary for the citadel pressure to exceed the static pressure exerted by the relative wind at leakin g positions in the citadel boundary. An in-service citadel pressure of 50mm water gauge WG minimu m is the acceptable standard. This is equal g45 to the static pressure exerted by a 56-knot relative wind. If the citadel pressure was reduced to 25mm WG this would be sufficient only in a 40-knot relative wi nd. Test procedures aim at achieving a minimum standard of 6.875 mbar 70mm WG at the HAT citadel with a corresponding pressure of 5 mbar 50mm WG at the SAT citadel , and are operationally essential in new construction ships. 3611. Test requirements for air filtr ation units AFU are specified in BR 6590003, for Filter Unit NBC No 3 and in BR 6590002 for Filter Unit NBC No 6 and 7. 3612. Types of Citadel Test The citadel concept cannot be effective unless rigorous air tests are enforced to ensure the boundaries are initially tight a nd subsequently do not decline dur ing service. The two tests are a.Vacuum Test. Carried out for leak det ection, for subsequent repair. b.Pressure Test. Carried out to determine the de gree of air-tightness of the citadel boundaries. 3613. Vacuum Test a. Close all known openings in the citadel boundary, ie doors, hatc hes and ventilation openings except para d below. b. Shut off all ventilation in the citadel.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-5 Change 3c. Stop as much machinery as possible to achieve a quiet ship. d. Run an exhaust fan of adequate size to draw an initial vacuum large enough for leaks to become evident by hissing, and arrange to measure the fan output as in Para 3615. A 250mm or 310mm centrifugal fan such as fitted in the galley is normally sufficient for the whole citadel in a small ship or up to a 2,830 cubic metres section in a large ship. e. Plug leaks with temporary sealant, noting the location of each leak.f. Once the large leaks have been sealed, the vacuum will increase and the smaller leaks will become more apparent. As th ese are progressively stopped the corresponding degree of tightness will be indicated by the higher readings on the U-tube. The test isnot complete until all measurable leaks ha ve been stopped. The fan output is then measured and the maximum U-tube reading taken when steady. For a successful test,the leakage worked out from the formula given must be within the capacity of thenumber of AFUs fitted. g. If the test is not successful, the search for leaks must be continued. An important conclusion to the test is to make good the temporary stoppings by permanent repair and to re-test the whole citadel. h. Classes of ships are provided with check-off lists detailing all citadel openings. Ships are responsible for up-dating these lis ts as As and As are completed. Ships without check-off lists are to make full use of as fitted drawings including the NBC arrangement drawing. 3614. Pressure Test a. Close all Alfa opening s and open Romeo openings. b. Restrict access to and from the citadel to the minimum essential numbers, using only the recognised airlocks. c. Run the ventilation system in its norma l closed-down recirculation condition and start the AFU fans. Run machinery space fans. Care must be taken to ensure that therecirculating fans do not contribute to the citadel pressure by drawing air from theoutside atmosphere through leaking flap closures. d. Record the internal pressu re shown by the manometers. 3615. Instrumentation for Testing a.Pressure and Vacuum. A 150mm U-tube or an elect ronic manometer can be used for sensing citadel pressure or vacuum. See BR 21702 fo r details of both instruments.BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-6 UK RESTRICTEDb.Exhaust Fan Output. For vacuum tests, a velomete r is used. This measurement will give the fan output against the vacuum achieved. To calculate the leakage areaeither of the following formulae may be used 1 S.I. Units 2 Imperial Units A 106 mm2 Q P 12 0.A 0.036Q P sq in Where A is the area of leakage in sq mm, Q is the fan output in m3 per second and P is the pressure onthe U-tube water gauge inmillibars.Where A is the area of leakage in sq in, Q is the fan output in cu ft perminute and P is the inches of watergauge pressure measured on theU-tube. Note. 1 inch water gauge is equivalent to 2.5 millibars. 3616. Harbour Acceptance Trial Citadel Ships being built or undergoing Upkeep Periods are to be given a HAT Citadel before entering service. For ships building, the HAT Citadel is to be undertaken by the shipbuilder and completed to the satisfaction of the Resident Project Officer. In other instances the trial willbe the responsibility of the Upkeep Authority a nd carried out by them with the assistance, if necessary, of the Ships Staff. The trial is to be included in the completion programme and is notto be undertaken until all fitting-out or repair work affecting th e citadel is complete. The HAT Citadel is to be conducted in two parts as follows a.Pre-HAT Citadel. A vacuum test is to be carri ed out using temporary sealing as necessary to determine leaks. A pressure te st is to be conducted to check the running of the AFUs and the citadel pressure. If the pressure fails to reach the minimum standard set by MODN a further search is to be ma de for leaks. All leaks found are to be made good and at least one week is to be allo wed between pre-HAT and HAT for this purpose. b.HAT Citadel. This need only be a pressure test , providing a pressure of at least the minimum standard set by MODN is achie ved without the use of temporary sealing. If this pressure is not achieved, leaks are to be found, repaired pe rmanently and the test repeated until the minimum standard is achieved. 3617. Sea Acceptance Trial Citadel To prove the operational material state of the citadel, a pre ssure test is to be conducted at sea during post-upkeep trials, or Part IV prog ramme for new construction ships. If a pressure of at least the minimum standard set by MODN is not achieved, leaks are to be located ifnecessary by vacuum test and rectified by DEFREP procedure. The trial is to be repeated on g45 completion. 3618. Spare.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-7 Change 33619. Firefighting Equipment Inspections In new construction ships, a series of inspec tions of firefighting e quipment is carried out. The inspections aim to ensure that all fixed and portable firefighting equipment is available, inthe correct place and that the relevant Test Forms have been completed and signed. Theseactivities s hould be complete by Contract Acceptance Date CAD, which is also the date at which the vessel is accepted into naval service. 3620. Inspections are the responsibility of the platform Integrated Project Team IPT, who may call upon MCTA to provide specialist s upport and advice for the following serials a.Preliminary Inspection. Normally conducted by th e Resident Project Officer RPO staff, with the Shipbuilder and Ships Staff, this is a check, against thefirefighting general arrangement drawings, to ensure that the basics are in place. b.Pre-Contractors Sea Trial CST Inspection. This is conducted by the IPT, with the RPO, Shipbuilder and Ships Staff. This inspection is part of the requirement toobtain Fire Safety Cer tification, which the ship must have prior to proceeding to sea for the first time on CSTs. It s hould be noted that for CSTs the portable firefighting equipment embarked is normally non-MOD pa ttern, supplied by the shipbuilder. The inspection will ensure that the portable e quipment is in sound working order and is stowed in the correct place normally as per RN fit. An audit of the relevant Test Formswill also be undertaken to ensure that the fi xed systems ie engine room gas drench and the HPSW system required for CSTs are complete in all respects. The inspection willalso ensure that the Ships Staff who nor mally form the SSEP during CSTs have had adequate time to conduct firefighting tr aining onboard and are familiar with the equipment. c.Final Inspection. This is conducted prior to Acceptance of Contract g45 AoCProgramme Acceptance Date PAD by the IPT with RPO staff, the Shipbuilder g45 and Ships Staff in attendance. The aim is to ensure that the full RN fit of equipment isin place and in sound working order. The general arrangement drawings will again be used and the HATNBCD document completed as far as possible. A final audit of the relevant Test Forms w ill also be undertaken. 3621. At each of the above inspections, any defects or deficiencies are r ecorded in the Defect and Deficiencies Data Base D3B, whic h forms part of the acceptance documentation. 3622. Practical discharge tests of fi xed foam systems are conducted as part of the relevant Test Forms, and in First of Class Ships, a full discharge trial of any gas drench system will normallybe undertaken to ensure that concentra tion levels are in line with calculations. 3623. Damage Control Equipment Inspections Damage control is covered in the same way as firefighting, with a pre-CST inspection, to ensure that the agreed minimum of equipment is in place for sea trials, and a final inspectionwhich covers the full outfit. As with firefigh ting, the opportunity is taken, during the final inspection, to complete as much of the HATN BCD document as possible, although in both cases it is the material aspects that are looked at in detail. Ships Staff are responsible for ensuring that procedures are in place, in acco rdance with current Safety and Readiness Check g45 SARC documentation. g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-8 UK RESTRICTED3624. The operation of portable pumps and other porta ble equipment is eith er conducted as part of a Test Form activity or as individual trial Ships Staff w ill always be involved. 3625 to 3626. Spare. 3627. Fire Safety Certification All Royal Navy ships, submarines and RFAs are to be issued with a Design and Material State Fire Safety Certificate by the relevant IPT Team Leader. This certificate, which is part of g45 the overall ship safety assessment, verifies that the residual fire safety risks have been reduced to a level that is as low as is reasonably practicable ALARP. The fire safety of the ship is alsodependant on the competence and training of the Ships Staff and the ongoing routine maintenance of firefighting systems these are the responsibility of CINCFLEET and are not g45 covered by the certificate. 3628. The certificate validity will initially be from CSTs to first refit. The certificate will then be re-validated near the end of the refit before the vessel proceeds to Sea Acceptance Trials. ThePlatform IPT will suspend the certificate during major upkeep periods between refits if the g45 volume or nature of work significantly degrades the ships firefighting capability or adverselyaffects the vessels fire safety. The certificate will be re-instated on completion of a satisfactorymaterial state assessment. 3629. The issue of a Fire Safety Certificate by the MOD does not preclude the requirement to obtain Maritime and Coastguard Agency MCA fire safety certification for vessels which arecertified by maritime regulating authorities, such as Lloyds Register of Shipping. In theseinstances the MCA and MOD certificates will be complementary, with the latter covering anyaspects such as military equipment not covered by the MCA. 3630. Spare. 3631. Harbour Acceptance Trial NBCD A HATNBCD is to be carried out by Ships Staff, towards the end of an upkeep period, using Check Lists copied from the Annexes to this Chapter. The administrative procedures aredetailed in Fleet Engineering Orders FEO, including the auditing of completed Check Lists bythe Fleet Base Port Waterfront Organisation FWO . The three stages of a HAT NBCD are g45 a. Checks to be completed prior to Ships Staff Move Onboard SSMOB - Part I, as g45 part of SARC 1. g45 b. Checks to be completed prior to Ready Fo r Sea Date RFSD - Part II, pas part of g45 SARC 2. g45 c. Checks to be completed prior to Fleet Date Inspection FDI - Part III, as part of g45 SARC 3. g45UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-9 Change 33632. A Ships Officer is to be appointed HAT N BCD Coordinator and is to be responsible for a. Overall coordination of the HATNBCD inspections, ensuring full compliance with g45 the HAT documentation. g45 g45 b. Devising and implementing personnel and whole-ship NBCD training serials in g45 accordance with SARC requirements. These are to be achieved prior to g45 g45 1 SSMOB - SARC 1. g45 g45 2 RFSD - SARC 2 g45 g45 3 FDI - SARC 3 g45 g45 c. Compilation of a HATNBCD report for each Part ie Part I, II or III, deta iling g45 items outstanding, emphasising any sta rred items outstanding which affect g45 achievement of a successful HATNBCD. g45 g45 d. Presentation of the completed HATN BCD documentation to the Commanding g45 Officer via XONBCDO for approval. g45 g45 e. Drafting the achievement signal for each Part of the HATNBCD for the g45 Commanding Officer, in accordance with the SARC DCI and BR 9274 - Maintenance g45 of Operational Capab ility Surface Ships. g45 g45 f. Arranging for the Base Part FWO, Local FWO or FOST to audit the completed g45 HATNBCD Check List for each Part. g45 g45 g. Presentation of completed HATNBCD documentation to the FDI inspecting g45 authority. g45 g45 3633. The Whole-ship NBCDQ, as directed by the HATNBCD Coordinating Officer, is g45 responsible for the conduct of th e HATNBCD inspection and for g45 g45 a. Ensuring that personnel undertaking the HATNBCD inspections are in possession g45 of the correct documentation and are made aware of their duties. g45 g45 b. Correlating the results of Parts I, II and III of the HATNBCD inspections and g45 presenting the results to the HATNBCD Coordinating Officer. g45 g45 c. Ensuring that any discrepancies or deficiencies are dealt with in a timely manner, g45 paying particular attention to starred items which must be completed to achieve the g45 HATNBCD Parts I, II and III standards. g45 g45g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36-10 UK RESTRICTED3634. Ships Staff are to note the following when preparing for a HATNBCD. g45 g45 a. The date chosen for the inspections must be discussed and ag reed by all parties g45 involved with the ships upkeep period. Care ful coordination is required to ensure that g45 equipmentlockerssignwritingcommunications facilities are in place prior to the Ships g45 Staff inspections for each HATNBCD Part. Possible constraints limitations which may g45 affect the conduct of, or the ability to achie ve, a satisfactory HATNBCD standard are g45 to be discussed with the appropriate FWO or Squadr on for MMPP Staff and PCM. g45 g45 b. Certificates of compliance clean air certificate must be current and available for g45 inspection by FWOSquadron Staff during the audit. g45 g45 3635. Spare 3636. Prewetting - Sea Acceptance Trial During Part 4 acceptance trials and post upk eep period sea acceptance trials, ships are to carry out a trial of their prewetting systems. Stabilized ships can apply an enforced rollthrough a moderate angle to improve the sluicing effect. The trial is to ensure that all nozzlesare clear, that no leaks exist and that no work undertaken during the build or upkeep period has adversely affected the desired coverage. Defect s discovered during the trial are to be treated as DEFREPs and instances of poor coverage or inade quate drainage are to be reported, giving the g45 following information a. The area not wetted.b. Direction and speed of relative wind.c. Ship motion during trial, ie steady, rolling, pitching, stabilized, etc.d. Number of pumps in use and pressure in system.e. Other pertinent factors.UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-1 Change 3ANNEX A TO CHAPTER 36 HAT NBCD PRE-SSMOB CHECKS HMS ....................................... CheckReason for any Deviation Escape Routes 1. Are all escape hatchespanels clearly identified withESCAPE on both sides and also on adjacent structure withdirection arrows?2. Are all escape hatchespane ls operable from all positions, g45 with openingsroutes free from obstruction?3. Are all ladders stowed correc tly? ladders that cannot remain permanently rigged are to be rolled up and secured by 5 mmpolyester cord, with a slip knot4. Are portable wire ladders correctly fitted with hardwoodrungs and securely connected to the deckhead?5. Are escape hatch handwheels fitted with extension bars?MMPPs only. g45 6. Are escape routes marked correctly and logically throughoutthe ship? ESCAPE and arrow signs 1500 mm from deck anddot arrows on deck adjacent to notices. Are escape route ladders g45 clearly identified? g45 7. Are handwheelsoperating leve rs and T-bar operating handles painted with photoluminescent material? g45 8. Is there a routine for regula rly proving all escape hatches? g45g45 g45 g45 g45 g45 g45 Escape BA ELSA 1. Are holdings in accordance with the allowance?2. Are they distributed and stowed correctly?3. Are they charged to 180-200 bar?4. Are the cylinders in-date for test?5. Are all hoods and hoses within their shelf lives? BR217036. Are sets numbered for maintenance purposes?7. Are ESCAPE BA signs posted on all ELSA stowages?8. Are custody, accounting and main tenance procedures correct? 9. Have all ELSA stowage straps been modified? centre clip broken out of the buckle10. Are relief valves on dedicated charging panels set to 207 bar? 11. Are checks carried out, at least monthly on all ELSAs? g45g45 Watertight Integr ity Organisation 1. Is there an effective watertight integrity organisation?2. Is the S 326 Watertight Integr ity Log maintained correctly? 3. Are ship-specific instructions for the issue of MAY BELEFT OPEN tallies included inside the front cover?4. Are the instructions in accordance with the ships SGOs andNBCD Orders?5. Are the correct numbers and types of MBLO tallies held inHQ1?BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-2 UK RESTRICTEDCheckReason for any Deviation NBCD Training and Material Assessment Log 1. Do the contents comply with the instructions in BR 21705?2. Has the Log been weeded to dispose of unwanted records?3. Do the signatories regularly inspect the Log?4. Are recorded shortcomings being actioned? Harbour Watch Training Log 1. Do the contents comply with the instructions in BR 21705?2. Has the Log been weeded to dispose of unwanted records?3. Do the signatories regularly inspect the Log?4. Is the Harbour Watch Training Plan sound and up-to-date?5. Are the full range of Lecture Plans at the Annexes toBR 21705 Chapter 5 ava ilable to Duty Watches? 6. Are recorded shortcomings being actioned? NBCD Organisation g45 1. Is the number and employme nt of key NBCD personnel in g45 accordance with BR 21701 Chapter 2? g45 2. Do they all have the appr opriate NBCD qualification in g45 accordance with BR 21705? g45 3. Is there an effective system for accounting for all personnel in g45 the event of a harbour fire? g45 4. Is HFEP training carried out daily, using the lesson plans in g45 BR 21705? g45 NBCD Command Control Facilities 1. Are the HQ1 and HQ2 information boards in place, asdetailed in the BR 21701 A nnex 8A, and in good condition? 2. Are the Incident Boards as large as practicable and is thesymbology in accordance with BR 21701 Annex 8B?3. Are the securing arrangements for all boards adequate?4. Does Incident Board emergency lighting work effectively?5. Are there sufficient pegs, marker pens, etc?6. Are master copies of closing down cards for X, Y, Z, A, and M openings held in HQ1?7. Is a full set of Kill Cards S 3021, in plastic covers, held in HQ1?8. Are Smoke Clearance Plans held?9. Is the Green Line to FRPPs in working order? g45 10. Do the Main Broadcast mic rophone and alarm-push operate g45 correctly? g45 11. Are the correct number of MBLO tallies held, as specified in g45 the ships orders? g45 12. Is a working clock fitted? g45 13. Is there a working manometer for each sub citadel? g45 15. Is the duplicate key stowage in good order and an g45 organisation in place for the dist ribution of duplicate key boxes? g45 16. Is an Aide Memoire readily available for the OOD to cover g45 fireflood incidents? g45 17. Is the 999 telephone system working? g45 18. Is there a fluids stateboard? g45UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-3 Change 3CheckReason for any Deviation Petrol Stowages MMPPs ONLY g45 1. Are fuel tanks painted grey and contents identified with 25 mm red lettering?2. Are stowages marked PETROL STOWAGE NOSMOKING in white letters on a red background?3. Is the remote release at least 5 m from the stowage?Is the quick-release handle clearly identified?4. Does the mechanism appear operable? Is it in-date forfunctional test?g45 Flammable Gas Bottle Stowages 1. Are all bottles correctly stowed?2. Are the stowages correctly marked, identifying the gas?3. Are the spray operating valves clearly marked and operable? g45 4. Are the valves locked, with the keys available nearby?g45 Smoke Curtains 1. Do the curtains meet th e specification in BR 21701 Chapter 23?2. Do they appear to be smoketight?3. Is the fabric in good condition?4. Can they be easily deployed and tied back? g45g45 Galleys 1. Can the power switches be locked OFF only?2. Are the switches painted re d and marked SWITCH OFF IN THE EVENT OF A GALLEY FIRE?3. Is the exhaust vent flap operable from outside the galley, andare all operating positions clearly marked?4. Is a Kill Card, highlighting the position of the deep fat fryer,displayed outside the door?5. Are AFFF extinguishers available at each galley door?6. Are viewing ports spy holes f itted to doorsshutters, giving a view of the deep fat fryer?7. Are foodprovision lift doors marked KEEP SHUT WHENNOT IN USE?8. Are Galley vent flaps fitted, functional and clearly marked? g45 9. Are Galley fan starters identified as per BR 21701 g45 Chapter 3? g45g45 g45g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-4 UK RESTRICTEDCheckReason for any Deviation Breathing Apparatus DCFF 1. Are BA holdings in accordance with the allowance?2. Are BA lockers and spare cylinder stowages sited inaccordance with the Class Book?3. Is there a qualified BA maintainer, and the correct MMS.4. Are all cylinders and charging panel gauges in-date for test? 5. Are all cylinders numbered correctly?6. Do charged spare cylinders have the connection taped over? 7. Do nominated, correctly ma rked, BA lockers contain guidelines? iaw Annex 21E to BR 217018. Does each locker contain a pre-wear check list?9. Does each BA have a distress alarm fitted?10. Does each BA have a set number tally attached?11. Are BA control boards, w ith marker pen, stowed in nominated, correctly marked, BA lockers?12. Does each locker contain a firefighters hood and anti flash gloves?13. Are all sets fully charged? Minimum 10 bar below max HP g45 air system operating pressure. g45g45 g45 BA Extension Equipment 1. Are the holdings in accordance with the allowance?2. Are the lockers correctly stowed with one 2 m extensionfitted to a rescue mask and one separate 15 m extension?3. Are instructions displayed on the inside of the locker door?4. Are the rescue masks clean and the hoses in good condition? 5. Are the lockers portable? BA Charging Panels 1. Are all BA charging points fully functional or correctly g45 tagged out? g45 2. Has the air at each charging point been tested and does it g45 meet the specification for breathing air?3. Are ear defenders and goggles available at each charging g45 panel?4. Is the charging hose restraining wire attached to the hose andclipped to the panel?5. Are charging instructions displayed?6. Are the cylinder stowages used for recharging markedONLY TO BE USED FOR RECHARGING CYLINDERS?7. Is HQ1 OODSSC on MWV awar e of current status of all g45 BA charging points? g45 Fresh Air Breathing Apparatu s 1PBS Patrol Boats only 1. Is the apparatus easily available for entry from the weatherdeck?2. Is it in good repair and working order?UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-5 Change 3CheckReason for any Deviation HPSW Hydrants and Softwall Hoses 1. Are all hoses the correct size and in good condition?2. Are hoses correctly stowed in twin baskets? Outer hoserolled ready for running. Inner hose faked in basket, connectedto hydrant, and correct nozzle fitted. Waterwall on weather g45 decks and Firefighter between decks. g45 3. Are the rubber seals in all fe male hose connections in good condition?4. Are through-bulkhead connections painted red, fitted withrubber seals and blanking caps?5. Are all blanking caps fitted with retaining chains? g45 6. Is there a hose basket adjacent to all hydrants? g45 7. Have redundant blanking cap s been removed from hydrants which have hoses connected?g45 g45 g45 g45 Nozzles 1. Are all nozzles operable through the full range of travel? g45 2. Are all nozzles stowed in the closed position? g45 3. Are fixed hatch waterwall nozzles set at the correct angle, g45 and clear of obstruction?4. Are all FHWW fitted with operable instantaneous blanking g45 caps, bearing the same watertight and gastight markings as theparent hatches?g45 g45g45g45g45 Centre Feed Hose Reels 1. Are all CFHR set up in accordance with BR 21701?Two HPSW valves fitted. a. HPSW isolating valve pinned open.b. HPSW valve adjacent to the inductor panel shut.c. Three-position selector valve set to FOAM Mk 1 orfoamwater selection leve r set to FOAM Mk 2. d. Nozzle valve shut. One HPSW Isolating Valve Adjacent to Inductor Panel. a. HPSW valve adjacent to the inductor panel shut.b. Three-position selector valv e set to FOAM Mk 1 or foamwater selection leve r set to FOAM Mk 2. c. Nozzle valve shut. One HPSW Isolating Valve Not Adjacent to the InductorPanel not applicable to Mk 2. a. HPSW valve pinned open.b. Three-position selector valve shut.c. Nozzle valve shut. 2. Are all CFHR hoses, nozzles and pick-up spills in goodcondition?3. Are operating instructions displayed adjacent to eachCFHR?4. Are shaded deck plans, indicating the compartments served,displayed adjacent to each CFHR?5. Is the foam position clearly marked using photo-luminescent g45 tape? g45g45 g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-6 UK RESTRICTEDCheckReason for any Deviation Foam Making Equipment 1. Are FB5X branchpipes sited only between decks and in the UDRFPP with the spill pick ups fitted? g45 2. Are only Mk 2 FB5X branchpipes held and checked asfollows a. Pick-up suction holes clear?b. Rubber tubing not cracke d, perished or distorted? c. Strainer clear?d. Pick-up spill connected to branchpipe?e. Foam mix selector set to 6 ?f. Non-return valve fitted in spill pick-up coupling? 3. Are FB1010 branchpipes located only at the hangar flightdeck, and checked as follows a. Are the control vanes greased and free?b. Are they stowed under cover unless at Flying Stations? 4. Are the caps on all AFFF drums only hand tight, with anunbroken security seal?5. Are the holdings of AFFF drums in accordance with theallowance and in-date for shelf life? 20 years6. Are all FBU5 inductors stowed with a 2m hose? g45 7. Are the holdings of FBU5 inductors and associated 2 m g45 hoses correct?8. Are FBU5 inductors stowed adjacent to machinery spaces? g45 9. Where fitted, are AFFF storage tanks marked with 20 mm g45 white letters on a red background 5 MINUTES TOTALCAPACITY OF AFFF? Foam Tubes 1. Are the caps free and fitted with sealing washers and retaining chains where applicable?2. Are notices posted, stating th e compartment served and the number of AFFF drums required for full bilge coverage?3. Are the caps engraved to indicate the compartment served?4. Where deck caps are fitted, are keys sited adjacent to eachone?5. Are AFFF drums stowed adjacent to all foam tubes? g45UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-7 Change 3CheckReason for any Deviation Portable Fire Extinguishers 1. Is the number of AFFF, dry powder and CO2 extinguishers in accordance with the allowances?2. Does each extinguisher and stowage have a clearly marked,unique identification mark number? g45 3. In compartments fitted with CO 2 injection points, is the correct type of diffuser fitted to CO2 extinguishers? 4. Are portable extinguishers fitted with safety pins and anti-tamper tags, fully charged, serviceable and in-date for test?5. Is there adequate provision of bulk AFFF for rechargingextinguishers, stored separately from AFFF drum stowages?6. Is the SPE recharging cylinder in-date for test? g45g45 g45 Fixed Firefighting Systems 1. Are system valves, etc clearly identified? 2. Are operating instructions displayed and correct? 3. Are keys operating handles available at all operating positions4. Where applicable, is the back-up system correct? egwaterAFFF back-up to gas drench5. In compartments fitted with steam or CO 2 drench, is one ventilation flap marked TO BE SHUT BUT NOT CLIPPEDWHEN STEAMCO 2 DRENCHING? 6. Are warning signs posted at the entrance to compartments,denoting gas used? including gas bottle stowages.7. Are the visual and audible wa rning alarm systems functional? g45 8. Is the operating CO 2 bottle fitted available with safety pins g45 fitted? g45 9. Are all operating positions functional? g45 10. Is the Halon CO2 bottle store correctly identified? g45g45 g45g45g45g45 Firefighters Clothing 1. Are the holdings iaw BR 21703? g45 2. Are the fearnought suits, boots and stockings held in good g45 condition? g45 3. Do all BA lockers contain one firefighters hood and one pair of anti-flash gloves, and are they in good condition?g45 g45g45 Firefighters Helmets 1. Are the holdings of helmets in accordance with the g45 allowance? iaw BR 21701 g45 2. Do the built-in radios and hand-held radios provide clearcommunications?3. Do the ships orders provide clear guidance on the selectionof radio channels?g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-8 UK RESTRICTEDCheckReason for any Deviation Thermal Imaging Cameras 1. Are all TIC stowed with Duracell batteries fitted?2. Are all TIC regularly pr oved by a functional test? 3. Are spare batteries readily available in either the TIC box or g45 at the FRPPs? g45g45 g45 Electric Submersible Pumps 1. Is a 12 mm diameter lowering line spliced to each pump?2. Are the power cables whipped to the lowering lines?3. Are the Weda pump accessories held? see BR 217014. Are the pumps secured properly?5. Is a functional test regularly completed?6. Are the power sockets pa inted yellow and numbered in black?7. Are the socket interlocks effective?8. Are Type A or Type B adaptor leads held iaw BR 217019. Are all pumps in date for electrical testing? g45 Diesel and Gas Turbine Driven Pumps 1. Is the full outfit of accessories held in accordance withBR 21701 Chapter 28 and the pump BR?2. Is a functional test regularly completed?3. Are the pumps secured properly?4. Do all suction hoses have good coupling seals? Portable Eductors 1. Are the holdings of eductors and associated accessories ateach FRPP in accordance with BR 21703?2. Is a functional test regularly completed?3. Do the suction hoses have good coupling seals? Indicator Test Plugs 1. Are ITPs easily workable by hand and unpainted?2. Are leatherfibre and metal washers fitted?3. Do those fitted to magazines and flammable stores have asplit pin fitted? DCFF Equipment 1. Are the contents of FRPP lockers in accordance withBR 21703 and the displayed contents list, and in goodcondition?2. Is the DCFF equipment stowed adjacent to FRPPs and atdispersed positions in accordance with BR 21703 and in goodcondition?3. Is the equipment at the Upper Deck Re-entry Fire Party Post in accordance with BR 21703 and in good condition?4. Is all electrical equipment in date for electrical testing? g45 5. Is NBCD open line working? g45UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-9 Change 3CheckReason for any Deviation Main Machinery Space Ventilation Systems g45 1. Are all MMS ventilation starte rs identified as per BR 21701 g45 Chapter 3? g45g45 g45g45 Check List Completion by Ships Staff Signature .................... Print Name ......................... RankRate ......... Post ...................... Audit by Fleet Waterfront StaffSignature .................... Print Name ......................... Rank .................. Post ......................BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36A-10 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36B-1 Change 3ANNEX B TO CHAPTER 36 HAT NBCD PRE-RFSD CHECKS HMS ...................................... CheckReason for any Deviation NBCD and Identification Markings 1. Do the following openings have the correct risk, control and location markings in accordance with BR 21701 and the shipsClass Book? a. Doorsb. Hatchesc. Vent terminals and trunkingsd. Scuttles and deadlightse. Opening bridge windowsf. Electrical connectors, sockets and deck tubesg. Escape scuttles and hatchesh. Ventilation spigots in water tight doors CVS and T 42 only 2. Are the following systems and fittings correctly identified inaccordance with BR 21701 and BR 21703? a. Pipe systemsb. Gas boxesc. Discharge overboard valvesd. Drains and dischargese. Watertight slide valvesf. Trunksg. Foam tubesh. Through-bulkhead hose connections 3. Are the following marked with photoluminescent paint? a. HPSW system main isolating valvesb. Machinery space fire isolation valves g45 c. BA charging panel isolating valvesd. Remote diesel engine stops g45 e. Remote fuel stops for auxiliary boilers g45 f. The fully closed position on Leith Cardle WT door handles g45 g. Operating levershandwheels on escape scuttles g45 4. Are valves and hydrants on the HPSW main identified in accordance with BR 21701 Chapter 3?g45 g45g45g45g45g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36B-2 UK RESTRICTEDCheckReason for any Deviation Miscellaneous Markings 1. Are the following signs in accordance with BR 21701 Chapt 3? a. Other Side markingsb. Sub citadel boundariesc. NBCD zone boundariesd. Compartment Contents circlese. Two clip markingsf. Compartment below signs g. Shelter routesh. Upper-deck MMS boundary cooling markings. g45g45 Incinerator Compartments 1. Is the remote fuel drain valve clearly marked? 2. Are there clear operating instruc tions, including clinker and ash removal?3. Is there a SPE AFFF in the vicinity? Citadel Airlocks 1. Are the insides of both doors marked CITADEL OUT and the outsides marked CITADEL IN ?2. Are light exclusion plates fitted to the viewing ports?3. Are air bleed valves whe re fitted in good condition? Seat Covers and DIY Additions 1. Are all seat units fitted with removable, flame retardant covers? 2. Are seat locker lids securable?3. Are DIY additions in messes a. Made of flame retardant materials?b. Readily removable?c. Clear of any DCFF arrangements? Ramset Tool 1. Is the holding in accordance with the allowance? 2. Is the correct set of charges held?3. Are ear defenders and goggles included in the set?4. Are there sufficient trained operators completed NBCD35 g45 course? g45 Mobile Repair Party Post g45 1. Are immersion suits available? g45 2. Are two fully stocked leak stopping bags available? g45 3. Is there a dedicated and f unctional communication line between g45 the MRP and the MCRSCC? g45UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36B-3 Change 3CheckReason for any Deviation Thermal Lance Cutting Equipment 1. Is the holding of cutting equipment and oxygen cylinders in accordance with the allowance?2. Is a regular functional test carried out?3. Are there sufficient trained operators?4. Is a set stowed in the superstructure, within reach of a hatchleading between decks?5. Are the batteries recharged at least every 8 weeks?6. Is a copy of the operating instructions included in the case?7. Are the oxygen cylinders stowed in a correct location, as near as practicable to the set? Cutting and Spreading Equipment 1. Is the holding in accordance with the allowance? 2. Is a functional test of all components regularly carried out? 3. Are there sufficient trained operators?4. Is the equipment stowage readily accessible to the MRP?5. Is a copy of the operating instructions stowed with it? 6. Are visorgoggles and heavy duty gloves stowed with it? Emergency Electrical Supplies 1. Are cables and stowages correctly marked? pre Type 23 ships 2. Are cables and connectors in good condition?3. Are portable transformers and fuse panels in good condition? HP AirHydraulic Hose Repair Kits 1. Is the correct outfit held in accordance with BR 21703? 2. Is the stowage accessible to the MRP? g45g45 Magazine Spray Systems 1. Are manual spray valves lock ed and the keys available adjacent to the valves?2. Are automatic spray systems correctly set up in accordancewith the operating instructions?3. Are spray systems identified and operating instructions clearlydisplayed? white on red Petrol Stowages excluding MMPPs g45 1. Are fuel tanks painted grey a nd contents identified with 25 mm red lettering?2. Are stowages marked PETROL STOWAGE NO SMOKINGin white letters on a red background?3. Is the remote release at least 5 m from the stowage?Is the quick-release handle clearly identified?4. Does the mechanism appear operable? Is it in-date forfunctional test?g45BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36B-4 UK RESTRICTEDCheckReason for any Deviation Hangar Spray System 1. Is the spray operating valve or pneumatic control locked and the key available nearby?2. Is the spray system identified and operating instructions clearlydisplayed? white on red SF90 Mobile Foam Unit 1. Is the holding of SF90s for the aviation facilities in accordance with the allowance?2. Is the foam tank correctly fille d with a 6 AFFF fresh water solution?3. Is the air cylinder charged to 123 bar? 10 kg CO 2 Extinguisher 1. Is the holding in accordance with the allowance for the aviation facilities?2. Are the flexible hose, extending lance and removable discharge horn in good condition?3. Is the CO 2 cylinder fully charged? Flight Deck Foam Monitors 1. Are the monitors set to the automatic oscillating mode, with the nozzle centred, the correct elevation and the correct spray angle?2. Is the system correctly set up in accordance with the operatinginstructions?3. Does the tank contain 1 AFFF, to the correct level?4. Are system valves identified and operating instructions clearly displayed? white on red Hangar Firefighting Locker 1. Are the contents of the locker in accordance with BR 21703? single spot ships Fire and Repair Party Posts 1. Are the locker contents and adjacent equipment itemized on check lists?2. Are locker drawers marked to show contents?3. Are locker keys available in a glass-fronted keybox?4. Are the following held at each Post? a. Personnel muster cardsb. State 1 preparation check listsc. State 1 dispersal pland. Patrol route cardse. Kill cards for compartments covered by that FRPf. Closing down cards for Yankee, Zulu, Alfa and Mike openings 5. Is the whole-ship incident board stowed securely and inaccordance with its classification when not in use, but portable whenrigged?UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36B-5 Change 3CheckReason for any Deviation 6. Does the incident board emergency lighting work? 7. Does the incident board show personnel locations at State 1? 8. Is there a whole-ship electrical board?9. Is there an electrical underground map?10. Is there a green line to HQ1 and Section Base11. Is there a clock?12. Are there stowage arrangements for duplicate key boxes?13. Is there a whole-ship HPSW system board?14. Are the patrol, leakstopping and shoring bags held in accordance g45 with BR 21703?g45 Machinery Space DC Equipment 1. Are the DC boxes and bags in accordance with BR 21703? 2. Are the boxes properly secured, fully stocked iaw BR 2170 and g45 the contents available for immediate use?3. Are the shoring materials in accordance with BR 21703,properly secured and available for immediate use?4. Are all eductors func tional and ready for use? g45 5. Are all MMS manometers filled with water coloured with g45 Methyl Orange? g45 6. Are signs posted at accesses deta iling length of hoses required to g45 reach extremities of compartment? g45 7. Are the following held in each DC box? g45 a. State 1 preparation cards. g45 b. Blanket search cards. g45 c. Fire isolation cards for adjoining main machinery g45 spaces. g45 d. Muster list for DC box. g45 8. Is DC equipment available in the Tiller Flat? g45g45 g45 g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45g45 HQ2 large ships only 1. Is the location separated from HQ1 by at least two main transverse bulkheads?2. Are the equipment and documen tation as specified for HQ1? Section Bases large ships only 1. Are the facilities in accordance with BR 21701 Chapter 8?BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36B-6 UK RESTRICTEDCheckReason for any Deviation Alternative HQ AHQ 1. Does the location give easy access to fresh air? 2. Is a whole-ship incident board available, with a stowage and emergency lighting?3. Is a full set of kill cards and smoke clearance plans available?4. Is a HPSW system board available?5. Is an NBCD ventilation board available?6. Is an NBCD electrical information board available?7. Are the following communications available? a. NBCD open line to HQ1, FRPPs and Ops Roomb. Green linec. Main broadcastd. Exchange telephonee. Field telephone and cable m ay be stowed in UDRFPP Weapon Section Base 1. Are WSB facilities available in accordance with BR 21701 Chapter 8?2. Is an alternative WSB available in accordance with BR 21701Chapter 8? Orders and Publications 1. Is the NBCD section of Ships General Orders in accordance with BR 21701 Chapter 35?2. Are the Ships NBCD Orders in accordance with BR 21701Chapter 35?3. Are Volumes 1, 2, 3 and 5 of BR 2170 held and at the latest change state? for current change state, ring NBCD Fleet StaffAuthor on MoD 93825-27524. Are the holding and custody of the NBCD Class Book inaccordance with the CB Register?5. Where applicable, is the holding and custody of the ShipStability and Survivability Book in accordance with the CBRegister?6. Are the Stability Statement, Curves of Statical Stability andHydrostatic Partic ulars up-to-date? 7. Are NBCD posters, selected from BR 21703, displayed aroundthe ship?8. Is ATP 45 Volume 1 held, and at the latest change state?9. Is the BRACIS software held and available for use?UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36B-7 Change 3CheckReason for any NBCD Organisation 1. Is BR 9274 being used as a basis for NBCD training? g45 2. Are the HFEP and SSEP organisations in accordance with g45 BR 21701 Chapter 20?3. Are daily duty watch lists, detailing HFEP duties, displayed g45 effectively?4. Has a Jettison Bill been produced? g45 5. Are there any outstanding AAs or major defects affecting the g45 NBCD capability?6. Are regular HoD covered Fire exercises being conducted and g45 recorded? g45 Emergency Medical Facilities 1. Are First Aid Posts and Seconda ry Medical Positions provided and clearly identified?2. Are sufficient First Aiders trained in accordance withBR 21701 Chapter 13? Citadel 1. Has a satisfactory HAT Citadel been completed? 2. Are all manometers filled with water, coloured with methylorange? 3. Are all manometers marked to show the differential pressurebeing measured? eg Zone 1 atmosphere4. Is a portable digital manometer held?5. Are all AFUs in-date for test and filter life? Collective Protection in Non-Citadel Ships 1. Are the COLPRO arrangements clearly defined in the ships orders? UCPS or sanctuary2. Are the material arrangem ents available and proven? NBC Protection Officer Facilities 1. Can the NBCPO be accommodated in or adjacent to HQ1? 2. Does the NBCPO have easy access to the following? a. Communications to the Command Adviserb. The SIRS indicating unitc. Main broadcast 3. Is the following documentation available to the NBCPO? a. Total Dose Record Boardb. Loglog graph paperc. Stay-time tabled. Monitoring Route Cards in splashproof coverse. Radiological Monitoring and Decontamination Boards f. Chemical State Boardg. Citadel inout Logi. NBCPOs incident BoardBR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36B-8 UK RESTRICTEDCheck List Completion by Ships Staff Signature .................... Print Name ......................... RankRate ......... Post ...................... Audit by Fleet Waterfront Staff Signature .................... Print Name ......................... Rank .................. Post .............UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36C-1 Change 3ANNEX C TO CHAPTER 36 HAT NBCD PRE-FDI CHECKS HMS ...................................... CheckReason for any Deviation TV and VDU Protection 1. Do all TVs and VDUs have protective coveringsbags? Prewetting 1. Is the system identified by PREWET tape? 2. Are operating valves marked by PREWET tape either side of the valves?3. Are all operating and drai n valves locked shut? 4. Are low level nozzles fitted on the flight deck?5. Has a satisfactory prewetting trial been completed? Cleansing Stations 1. Is the entry door marked CLEANSING STATION on the outside in orange letters?2. Does the final exit door bear an M control marking?3. Do air bleed valves give a purging flow from the citadel,diagonally across all ar eas, to atmosphere? 4. Are the paintwork, fittings and equipment in good condition and in accordance with BR 21702 Chapter 14?5. Are all areas of the cleansing station clear of extraneous items,unless specifically authorised by the Command? Cleansing Posts 1. Are Cleansing Posts sited in accordance with the Class Book? 2. Are they marked CLEANSING POST in orange letters?3. Are the cleansing lockers stocked in accordance with BR 21702Chapter 14? CAM 1. Are holdings of CAM in accordance with the allowance? 2. Are CAMs, which are not vacuum packed, run up weekly?3. Are the CAM, battery and protective nozzle within their shelflives? iaw BR21703 NAIAD 1. Are the holdings of NAIAD in accordance with the allowance? 2. Are the reagent module and enzyme pad within their shelf lives? iaw BR 21703BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36C-2 UK RESTRICTEDCheckReason for any Deviation SICS 1. Is the system serviceable and an onboard test kit held? 2. Are the filter paddle assembly and replenishment kit within theirshelf lives? iaw BR 21703 RVD 1. Are the holdings of RVD in accordance with the allowance? 2. Is the RVD training aid held?3. Are the reagents within their shelf lives? iaw BR 21703 Chemical Detector Papers 1. Are holdings of 1-colour and 3-colour detector papers in accordance with the allowance? g45 Water Test Kit Biological and Chemical g45 1. Is the kit held, complete with consumables? g45 2. Is there a trained operator? g45 Radiac Instruments 1. Are the holdings of the following instruments held in accordance with the allowance? a. Quartz Fibre Dosimeter and Charging Unitb. General Purpose BetaGa mma Monitor ADM 300AV1A c. Potable Water Contamination Monitor MK25 NRM 2. Is the SIRS serviceable and regularly tested? NBC and Decontamination Suits 1. Are the holdings of IPE in accordance with the allowances and within their shelf lives? iaw BR 217032. Are the holdings of Decontamination Suits in accordance with theallowance? NBC Respirators 1. Are all personal respirators within the 20-year life, in-date for test g45 and held onboard? 2. Are fibre discs fixed to resp irators and haversacks, giving personal details?3. Are the haversack contents in accordance with BR 21702Chapter 12?4. Are stocks of both types and a ll sizes of NBC respirator, and spare canisters held? iaw BR 217035. Are all stock and personal spare re spirator canisters within their shelf lives? iaw BR 217036. Have corrective lenses been issued, where needed?UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36C-3 Change 3CheckReason for any Deviation Air Filtration Units g45 1. Do the gas filters have a practicable in-service life remaining? g45 2. Where this is less than 12 m onths, has a suitable maintenance g45 period been identified for changing filters? g45g45 g45g45g45 NBC Contamination Control Stores 1. Are the holdings of the following in accordance with the allowances? a. DAP2b. CADc. Citric acidd. Fullers earthe. Conwed sorbent rugf. DKP1 and DKP2g. Combopen and NAPS in MOs custodyh. Combopen training devicei. NBC casualty bag 2. Are there sufficient stocks of the following? a. GP detergent, scrubbers , etc for decontamination b. Paperplastic bags and paper towels for cleansing stations c. Trigene disinfectant for respirator facepieces NBCD Radioactive Sources 1. Are the following items correctly stored and accounted for in the Radioactive Source Register? a. CAMb. Check source for MK 25 NRM Potable Water Monitorc. SIRS headsd. SICS Mk 10 drift tube Check List Completion by Ships Staff Signature .................... Print Name ......................... RankRate ......... Post ...................... Audit by Fleet Waterfront Staff Signature .................... Print Name ......................... Rank .................. Post ......................BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED 36C-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED IND-1 Change 3INDEX A 6 0 B u l k h e a d s......................................................... 2920 A c c e s s t o C o m p a r t m e n t s ................................................. 0420 A c t i o n C a r r y B a g s ...................................................... 0425 A c t i o n C o v e r a l l ........................................................ 2608 A c t i o n D r e s s........................................................... 2602 A c t i o n M e s s i n g ........................................................ 1209 A c t i o n N B C D O A N B C D O ......................................... 0224, 0806 A c t i o n - N B C D P r e p a r a t i o n s .............................................. 1030 Action Parallelling ...................................................... 1917 A d a p t o r s , H o s e......................................................... 2224 A d a p t o r s , F l a n g e .................................................. 2225, 2822 A H Q................................................................. 0863 A i r E s c a p e s ........................................................... 2915 A i r c r a f t F i r e f i g h t i n g..................................................... 2501 Alarm Systems - SANDOWN Class ........................................ 0709 A l a r m s , A u d i b l e........................................................ 0707 A l t e r n a t i v e W S B ....................................................... 0868 A l u m i n i u m - F i r e .................................................. 2147, 2505 A n t i F l a s h - C h e m i c a l T h r e a t.............................................. 2607 A n t i - F l a s h - K e y b o a r d O p e r a t o r s........................................... 2605 Aqueous Film Forming Foam AFFF ....................................... 2326 A R O A i r D r i v e n P u m p ............................................. A n n e x 2 8 EA t t a c k P a r t y ...................................................... 2010, 2038 A u t o m a t i c E m e r g e n c y L i g h t s A E L ........................................ 1921 A w k w a r d a n d B i k i n i .................................................... 1106 B A C o n t r o l B o a r d ...................................................... 2713 B A C o n t r o l l e r.......................................................... 2012 B A C o o r d i n a t o r ........................................................ 2020 B A T o t e B o a r d......................................................... 2715 BA Whistle Sounding ................................................... 2143 B a c k d r a u g h t ........................................................... 2129 B a l l a s t i n g ........................................................ 2804, 3030 Battle Damage Repair ................................................... 0110 B C F D r e n c h ...................................................... A n n e x 2 1 CBeryllium ............................................................. 2506 B l a n k e t S e a r c h .................................................... 0827, 1946 B l a s t R o u t e s ........................................................... 1454 Boundary Monitoring and Cooling .................................... A n n e x 2 1 B B R 8 7 5 ............................................................... 0614 BR 8647 .............................................................. 2406 Brace Drill ............................................................ 2671 B r a s s a r d s ............................................................. 2611 B r e a k e r C o l o u r C o d e s ................................................... 1912UK RESTRICTED IND-2 UK RESTRICTEDB r e a t h i n g A p p a r a t u s D C F F ............................................ 2701 B r e a t h i n g A p p a r a t u s P a r t y................................................ 2020 B r i d g e T e a m........................................................... 0817 B r o w s ................................................................ 2422 B T M D r e n c h ..................................................... A n n e x 2 1 CC a m l o c k H o s e C o u p l i n g s ............................................A n n e x 2 8 FCarbon Fibres - Fire ..................................................... 2509 C a r p e t P l o t s ........................................................... 3212 C a s u a l t y A l a r m s........................................................ 0730 C e m e n t B o x e s ......................................................... 1615 C e n t r e F e e d H o s e R e e l................................................... 2228 C i t a d e l ............................................................... 0518 Citadel Boundaries ...................................................... 0524 C i t a d e l T e s t s........................................................... 3610 CO 2 D r e n c h ...................................................... A n n e x 2 1 C CO2 E x t i n g u i s h e r , 2 k g ................................................... 2319 CO2 Extinguisher, 10kg .................................................. 2324 C o f f e r d a m s............................................................ 1515 C o m m a n d A d v i s e r ................................................. 0227, 0804 C o m m a n d A i m......................................................... 0803 C o m m a n d B r i e f i n g B o a r d ............................................ A n n e x 8 DCommand Huddles ...................................................... 0815 C o m m a n d R o v e r .................................................. 0808, 0839 C o m m a n d S t a t e B o a r d ............................................... A n n e x 8 CC o m m a n d T e a m........................................................ 0802 C o m m u n i c a t i o n s R a t i n g.................................................. 2023 C o m p o s i t e F i b r e s - F i r e .................................................. 2507 C o n d i t i o n A l f a - R e l a x a t i o n s .............................................. 0533 C o n d i t i o n s W T a n d G T ................................................. 0532 C o n d i t i o n s - R F A....................................................... 0610 C o n t a i n m e n t P a r t y ................................................. 2014, 2080 C o n t r o l M a r k i n g s....................................................... 0519 C o n t r o l o f O p e n i n g s i n L o w e r N B C D S t a t e s.................................. 0536 C o n t r o l P a r t y ..................................................... 2024, 2038 Counterflooding ................................................... 1540, 3309 C r a s h F i r e f i g h t i n g E n s e m b l e C F F E ....................................... 2631 C r a s h o n D e c k ............................................... 2560, Annex 25A C y a l u m e s ............................................................. 2144 D a m a g e C o n t r o l O f f i c e r D C O ...................................... 0226, 0811 D a m a g e C o n t r o l O f f i c e r E l e c t r i c a l D C O L ...................... 0228, 0812, 1940 D a m a g e R e p o r t s........................................................ 0836 D e f e c t i v e N B C D E q u i p m e n t .............................................. 3410 D e f e c t i v e P r o t e c t i v e C l o t h i n g - R e p o r t s ..................................... 2650 D e f e n c e W a t c h E m e r g e n c y P a r t y D W E P ................................... 0883 D e p a r t m e n t a l N B C D Q u a l i f i e d S e n i o r R a t i n g s................................ 0220UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED IND-3 Change 3D e p u t y M a r i n e E n g i n e e r O f f i c e r ........................................... 0214 Deputy Weapon Engineer Officer ..................................... 0215, 0814 D e s m i E m e r g e n c y F i r e P u m p ........................................ A n n e x 2 8 DDispersal of FRP Personnel ............................................... 0827 D I Y I m p r o v e m e n t s...................................................... 1404 Docking and Grounding .................................................. 3301 D r a i n a g e A r r a n g e m e n t s .................................................. 2802 Dutch Rolling of Hoses .................................................. 2246 D u t y L e a d i n g H a n d ..................................................... 2038 D u t y L W E M L O M...................................................... 2017 D u t y P e t t y O f f i c e r ...................................................... 2038 D u t y W E S e n i o r R a t e.................................................... 2038 E d u c t o r s .............................................................. 2815 E l e c t r i c a l D a m a g e C o n t r o l................................................ 1901 E l e c t r i c a l F i r e s ......................................................... 2160 E l e c t r i c a l I n f o r m a t i o n B o a r d .............................................. 1941 Embarked Military Forces ................................................ 2614 E m e r g e n c y B u l k h e a d H o s e C o n n e c t i o n s ..................................... 2227 E m e r g e n c y C a b l e R u n s .................................................. 1947 E m e r g e n c y C l e a r L o w e r D e c k ............................................. 0721 Emergency Elect rical Supply .............................................. 1924 E m e r g e n c y F e e d i n g S t a t i o n ............................................... 1214 Emergency Life Support Apparatus ......................................... 2740 E m e r g e n c y L i g h t i n g..................................................... 1922 E m e r g e n c y S t a t i o n s ..................................................... 0701 E m e r g e n c y E n t r a n c e s , A i r c r a f t ............................................ 2547 E m e r g e n c y W a r d ....................................................... 1311 E m m s C l a m p .......................................................... 1646 Escape Hatches and Scuttles .............................................. 0527 E s c a p e L a d d e r s ........................................................ 2913 E s c a p e M a r k i n g s .................................................. 0331, 2421 E T B O L............................................................... 0843 E x e c u t i v e O f f i c e r ....................................................... 0202 E x e r c i s e s ............................................................. 0413 E x p l o s i o n s , I n t e r n a l ..................................................... 1453 E x p l o s i o n s , N u c l e a r ..................................................... 1461 E x p l o s i o n s , U n d e r w a t e r............................................. 1455, 1456 E x p l o s i v e s a n d P y r o t e c h n i c s - F i r e ............................... A n n e x 2 1 D , 2524 E x t e n d e d D u r a t i o n B r e a t h i n g A p p a r a t u s ..................................... 2704 F a l l o u t M e s s i n g ........................................................ 1216 Fearnought Suit ........................................................ 2622 F i r e a n d R e p a i r P a r t i e s.............................................. 0820, 1502 F i r e a n d R e p a i r P a r t y P o s t s .......................................... 0865, 3409 F i r e B a r r i e r I n s u l a t i o n ................................................... 2919UK RESTRICTED IND-4 UK RESTRICTEDF i r e a n d E m e r g e n c y P a r t y - U p k e e p ........................................ 2413 F i r e H a z a r d s ........................................................... 1401 F i r e P r e v e n t i o n i n U p k e e p ................................................ 2408 Fire Rounds ........................................................... 2409 F i r e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e ................................................... 3627 F i r e S e n t r y ............................................................ 2169 Firefighters Helmet with Built-in Communications FFHBC ............... 0911, 2626 F i r e f i g h t i n g A s s i s t a n c e t o O t h e r S h i p s .................................. A n n e x 2 1 IF i r e f i g h t i n g C l o t h i n g A i r c r a f t ............................................ 2630 F i r e f i g h t i n g C l o t h i n g S h i p .......................................... 0424, 2621 F i r e f i g h t i n g i n N B C E n v i r o n m e n t ........................... 2166, Annex 21H, 2627 F i r e f i g h t i n g O r g a n i s a t i o n................................................. 2001 F i r e f i g h t i n g P r o c e d u r e s .................................................. 2101 F i r e f i g h t i n g T e a m s...................................................... 2141 F i r s t A i d - H F E P ....................................................... 2025 F i r s t A i d P o s t s ......................................................... 1308 F i r s t A i d T r a i n i n g ...................................................... 1315 Flashover ............................................................. 2128 F l a s h P o i n t ............................................................ 1406 F l i g h t D e c k s ........................................................... 2245 F l i g h t D e c k E m e r g e n c y - N B C D R e a c t i o n s ............................. A n n e x 2 5 AFlooding ............................................................. 1469 Flooding Boundary ...................................................... 1510 Flooding Systems ....................................................... 2236 F o a m T u b e s ................................................. A n n e x 2 1 C , 2336 F o a m U n i t , M o b i l e , S F 9 0 ................................................ 2322 F o r w a r d C o n t r o l P o i n t F C P .............................................. 2001 F r e e S u r f a c e ...................................................... 3033, 3120 G a l l e y F i r e s ........................................................... 2154 G a n g w a y S t a f f ............................................... 2022, 2038, 2043 G a s C y l i n d e r s - F i r e ..................................................... 2158 Gas-free Spaces ........................................................ 0518 Gas Turbine Module Re-entry Procedures ................................ A n n e x 2 1 J G a s e o u s F i r e f i g h t i n g S y s t e m s ........................................ A n n e x 2 1 CG a s t i g h t C o n t r o l........................................................ 0517 Godiva GN 500 Pump .............................................. A n n e x 2 8 C Godiva GN 1700 Pump ............................................. A n n e x 2 8 B Grounding ....................................................... 1457, 3307 G R P a n d F i r e .......................................................... 2148 G R P E m e r g e n c y R e p a i r P a c k ............................................. 1614 G u i d e l i n e ........................................................ A n n e x 2 1 EG u n t e r B a t t e n s ......................................................... 1632 H a n g a r F i r e s........................................................... 2163 H a n g a r S p r a y S y s t e m.................................................... 2243 UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED IND-5 Change 3H a n g a r s a n d F l i g h t D e c k ................................................. 0123 Harbour Acceptance Trial NBCD ......................................... 3631 Harbour Fire and Em ergency Party HFEP .................................. 2003 H a t c h G u a r d r a i l s i n S t a t e 1 .............................................. 0423 H e a d o f A i r D e p a r t m e n t.................................................. 0209 H e a d l a m p s ............................................................ 1935 H e a d s o f D e p a r t m e n t s ................................................... 0204 H e a t S t r e s s ............................................................ 2660 H e l i c o p t e r O p s i n M M P P - F i r e f i g h t i n g ..................................... 2561 H F E P i n M M P P ....................................................... 2041 H o g g i n g a n d S a g g i n g.................................................... 2902 H o s e R e p a i r K i t s ....................................................... 1619 H o s e s , F i r e ....................................................... 2211, 2420 H P S W M a i n...................................................... 2206, 2419 H P S W S y s t e m - F r e e z i n g ................................................ 1702 H P S W S y s t e m V a l v e M a r k i n g ............................................ 0333 H Q 1 ....................................................... 0110, 0861, 1501 H Q 1 I n f o r m a t i o n B o a r d s a n d C o n t r o l D o c u m e n t a t i o n ...................... A n n e x 8 AH Q 2 ............................................................ 0117, 0862 H u l l S e c t i o n O f f i c e r..................................................... 0213 H y d r a n t s.............................................................. 2210 I c i n g ................................................................. 1701 Identity Discs .......................................................... 1009 I g n i t i o n T e m p e r a t u r e .................................................... 1406 I m m e r s i o n C o v e r a l l ..................................................... 2615 I n c i d e n t B o a r d s .................................................... A n n e x 8 BI n d i c a t o r T e s t P l u g s ..................................................... 1509 Inductor, Inline, FBU5 ................................................... 2221 I n l i n e C o n t r o l l a b l e C o u p l i n g .............................................. 2223 I n s p e c t i o n s ....................................................... 3601, 3619 I n t e r n a t i o n a l S h o r e C o n n e c t i o n ....................................... 0617, 2823 Jettison Bill ........................................................... 1007 K e y s R a t i n g ........................................................... 2018 Kill Cards ........................................................ A n n e x 2 1 G L o c a l A u t h o r i t y F i r e B r i g a d e ......................................... 2056, 2407 L a n t e r n s , B a t t e r y O p e r a t e d ............................................... 1934 Leakstopping .......................................................... 1601 L i s t .................................................................. 3029 L o c a t i o n M a r k i n g s ...................................................... 0301 Logistics and Supply Officer LSO ................................... 0206, 1201 Logistics Support Cell ................................................... 1208 L o l l.................................................................. 3042UK RESTRICTED IND-6 UK RESTRICTEDMachinery Space Fires .............................................. A n n e x 2 1 C M a g a z i n e s - S e c u r i t y .................................................... 0422 Main Machinery Spaces ........................................ 0122, Annex 21C M a c h i n e r y O p e r a t i n g T e a m ............................................... 0828 M a g n e s i u m - F i r e....................................................... 2503 M a i n G r o u p ........................................................... 2008 Manhole Covers ........................................................ 0526 M a n n i n g f o r N B C D S t a t e s...................................... 0414, 0415, 0416 M a r i n e E n g i n e e r O f f i c e r ................................................. 0205 M a r k i n g s - L o c a t i o n a n d I d e n t i f i c a t i o n ................................... T a b l e 3 - 1May Be Left Open MBLO Tallies .................................... 0513, 0537 M E S p e c i a l i s t P a r t y ..................................................... 2019 M e d i c a l O f f i c e r ........................................................ 0211 M e d i c a l O r g a n i s a t i o n.......................................... 1301, 1314, 1319 M e t e o r o l o g i c a l O f f i c e r................................................... 0233 M o b i l e R e p a i r P a r t y..................................................... 0831 M o n i t o r , F l i g h t D e c k .................................................... 2247 N a r r a t i v e o f E v e n t s ..................................................... 0838 N B C D e f e n c e W a t c h C o o r d i n a t o r .......................................... 0232 N B C P a r t i e s ........................................................... 0118 N B C P r o t e c t i o n O f f i c e r .................................................. 0230 N B C P r o t e c t i o n O f f i c e r s A s s i s t a n t......................................... 0231 NBCD A i m s ............................................................ 0104 C o m m u n i c a t i o n s................................................... 0844 C o n t r o l P o s i t i o n s .................................................. 0112 C o n t r o l T e a m ..................................................... 0116 Definition ........................................................ 0101 M a n n i n g ......................................................... 0114 O r d e r s ................................................. 3501, Annex 35B O r g a n i s a t i o n ...................................................... 0111 P e r s o n a l K n o w l e d g e ................................................ 0105 P r i n c i p l e s o f O r g a n i s a t i o n ........................................... 0106 Priorities ......................................................... 0108 Responsibilities in MMPP ........................................... 0234 S e c t i o n s.......................................................... 0109 S t a t e s............................................... 0402, 0411, Table 4-1 S t a t e s a n d C o n d i t i o n s - R e l a t i o n s h i p ................................... 0534 S t a t e 2 O r g a n i s a t i o n ................................................ 0881 T r a i n i n g O r g a n i s a t i o n............................................... 0235 N B C D O f f i c e r - L a r g e S h i p s .............................................. 0225 N B C D Q s ............................................................. 0220 N o z z l e s............................................................... 2214UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED IND-7 Change 3O f f i c e r s .............................................................. 0219 O f f i c e r o f t h e D a y ....................................... 0218, 2024, 2044, 2058 O v e r b o a r d D i s c h a r g e C o n n e c t i o n s ......................................... 2818 O x y g e n E n r i c h m e n t ..................................................... 2159 P a t c h P a c k s ........................................................... 1610 P a t r o l s ............................................................... 0826 Permeability ........................................................... 3204 P i p e D a m a g e R e p a i r s.................................................... 1616 P i p e R e p a i r T a p e K i t s ................................................... 1618 P o w e r S o c k e t s f o r P o r t a b l e P u m p s .................................... 1932, 2819 Prewetting Trial ........................................................ 3636 P r o b a n F R T r e a t m e n t.................................................... 2612 Propulsion Manager ................................................ 0229, 0813 P u m p S u c t i o n s ......................................................... 0418 P u m p s , P o r t a b l e a n d M o b i l e ......................................... 1932, 2808 Q u a r t e r s .............................................................. 0119 R a c k i n g .............................................................. 2902 R a m f a n............................................................... 2233 R a m s e t T o o l........................................................... 1519 R e d R i s k M a r k i n g s ..................................................... 0508 R e - e n t r y T e c h n i q u e s ............................................... A n n e x 2 1 AR e s c u e o f A i r c r e w ...................................................... 2553 R I C E ................................................................ 0903 R i s k a n d C o n t r o l M a r k i n g s ..............................................F i g 5 - 1R o v e r E m e r g e n c y F i r e P u m p..........................................A n n e x 2 8 FRoyal Fleet Auxiliary .................................................... 0601 S a b o t a g e A t t a c k ........................................................ 1101 Salvage of Ships with Hazardous Cargoes ................................... 1551 S c e n e o f t h e I n c i d e n t S O T I .............................................. 2001 Scuttles and Windows ................................................... 0525 S e a r c h a n d R e s c u e ................................................. A n n e x 2 1 ESecondary Medical Position ............................................... 1310 S e c t i o n B a s e s ..................................................... 0117, 0864 S e n s o r s S t a t e B o a r d ..................................................A n n e x 8 FS h i p s G e n e r a l O r d e r s .............................................. A n n e x 3 5 AS h i p S a f e t y P l a n s ....................................................... 0613 S h i p S t r u c t u r e.......................................................... 2901 S h o c k D a m a g e ......................................................... 1465 S h o r e s , A d j u s t a b l e S t e e l ................................................. 1626 S h o r i n g............................................................... 1622 Shoring Methods ....................................................... 1635 SignallingGuide Lines .................................................. 0616UK RESTRICTED IND-8 UK RESTRICTEDS m o k e A l a r m - R e a c t i o n .............................................A n n e x 2 1 F S m o k e C l e a r a n c e P l a n s ............................................. A n n e x 2 1 GS m o k e C u r t a i n s ........................................................ 2341 S m o k e G e n e r a t o r s ...................................................... 2343 S P E P r e s s u r i z a t i o n...................................................... 2306 S p e c i a l S e a D u t y m e n .................................................... 0410 S p i g o t O p e n i n g s i n W a t e r t i g h t D o o r s ....................................... 0528 S p l i n t e r H a z a r d s........................................................ 1468 S p l i n t e r B o x e s ......................................................... 1609 S p r a y S y s t e m s ......................................................... 2236 Staff Weapon Engineer Officer ............................................ 0208 Stability, Basic ......................................................... 3001 Stability - Damaged Ship ................................................. 3201 Stability Information ............................................... 3062, 3123 Stability - Intact Ship .................................................... 3101 Stabilizers ............................................................. 3057 S t a n d a r d O p e r a t i n g P r o c e d u r e s ............................................ 0841 S t a n d i n g S e a E m e r g e n c y P a r t y ............................................ 2076 Standpipes, Suction ..................................................... 2816 S t a t i o n N u m b e r s........................................................ 0321 Stopper Plates .......................................................... 1613 Stored Pressure Extinguisher AFFF .................................. 2303, 2308 S t o r e d P r e s s u r e E x t i n g u i s h e r D r y P o w d e r ............................. 2305, 2312 S t o r e s a n d S t o r e r o o m s .............................................. 0419, 1203 S t o r e s , D C F F ....................................................... 3401 Subdivision ................................................. 0305, 0307, 2905 Support Party .......................................................... 2011 S u r c o a t s ......................................................... 2028, 2078 Switchboard Operators ................................................... 1949 Switchboards .......................................................... 1914 Telephones - Exchange .................................................. 0909 Telephones - Sound Powered .............................................. 0915 T e m p e r a t u r e M o n i t o r i n g S y s t e m ...................................... A n n e x 2 1 BT h e r m a l I m a g i n g C a m e r a ................................................ 2322 T h e r m a l L a n c e ......................................................... 1527 Underground Maps ..................................................... 1943 U n e x p l o d e d S a b o t a g e C h a r g e s ............................................ 1109 U p k e e p P e r i o d s ........................................................ 2401 U p p e r D e c k R e - e n t r y F i r e P a r t y P o s t........................................ 0866 V C S ................................................................ 0905 Ventilation .................................................. 1801, 2130, 2418 Ventilation Systems - Marking ............................................ 0317UK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED IND-9 Change 3W a r - N B C D P r e p a r a t i o n s ................................................ 1001 W a t e r F o g L a n c e ....................................................... 0615 W a t e r t i g h t a n d G a s t i g h t C o n d i t i o n s......................................... 0532 W a t e r t i g h t C o n t r o l ...................................................... 0512 W a t e r t i g h t C o n t r o l Q u a l i f y i n g S y m b o l s ..................................... 0516 W a t e r t i g h t R i s k ........................................................ 0506 W a t e r w a l l N o z z l e M o u n t i n g P o l e .......................................... 2216 W E S p e c i a l i s t.......................................................... 2013 Weapon Engineer Officer ................................................ 0207 Weapon Repair Organisation .............................................. 0832 Weapon Section Base .............................................. 0833, 0867 Weapons State Board ................................................ A n n e x 8 E W e d a P u m p ...................................................... A n n e x 2 8 AW e d g e s a n d P l u g s ...................................................... 1606 W e l d i n g a n d B u r n i n g S e n t r i e s ........................................ 2170, 2412 W h i p D a m a g e ......................................................... 1456 Working Groups and Committees ...................................... A n n e x 1 A Y Piece, Controllable .................................................... 2222 Z o n e M a r k i n g.......................................................... 0335 Z o n e s o f D a m a g e .................................................. 1464, 1508 Z o n i n g ............................................................... 2904UK RESTRICTED IND-10 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED LEP-1 Change 3LIST OF EFFECTIVE PAGES Subject Page Status Classification Title PageSponsor Information iii Change 3 UK Restricted PrefaceProposals for Changes iiiiv Change 3 UK RestrictedRecord of ChangesRecord ofTemporary Amendments vvi Original UK RestrictedContents viiviii Change 2 UK Restricted Chapter 1 1-11-2 Change 3 UK Restricted 1-31-4 Original UK Restricted1-5 to1-10 Change 3 UK Restricted1A-11A-2 Change 3 UK Restricted1A-31A-4 Original UK Restricted Chapter 2 2-12-2 Change 3 UK Restricted 2-32-4 Change 1 UK Restricted2-5 to 2-8 Change 3 UK Restricted2-9 to 2-12 Change 1 UK Restricted2-132-14 Original UK Restricted2-152-16 Change 3 UK Restricted2-172-18 Change 1 UK Restricted2-192-20 Change 2 UK Restricted2-212-22 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 3 3-13-2 Change 2 UK Restricted 3-3 to 3-8 Original UK Restricted3-93-10 Change 3 UK Restricted3-113-12 Change 1 UK Restricted3-133-14 Change 3 UK Restricted3-15 to 3-18 Change 2 UK Restricted Chapter 4 4-1 4-2 Change 2 UK Restricted 4-3 to 4-6 Change 1 UK Restricted4-74-8 Change 3 UK Restricted4-94-10 Change 2 UK Restricted4-11 to 4-14 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 5 5-15-2 Change 3 UK Restricted 5-35-4 Original UK Restricted5-55-6 Change 2 UK Restricted5-7 to 5-12 Original UK Restricted5-135-14 Change 1 UK Restricted5-155-16 Original UK Restricted5-175-18 Change 3 UK RestrictedUK RESTRICTED LEP-2 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED LEP-3 Change 3LIST OF EFFECTIVE PAGES Continued Subject Page Status ClassificationChapter 6 6-1 to 6-8 Original UK Restricted 6A-16A-2 Original UK Restricted6B-16B-2 Original UK Restricted Chapter 7 7-1 to 7-8 Original UK Restricted 7-97-10 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 8 8-1 to 8-4 Change 3 UK Restricted 8-5 to 8-8 Original UK Restricted8-9 to 8-12 Change 1 UK Restricted8-138-14 Change 2 UK Restricted8-15 to 8-18 Original UK Restricted8-198-20 Change 1 UK Restricted8-218-22 Change 3 UK Restricted8-238-24 Change 1 UK Restricted8-258-26 Change 1 UK Restricted8-278-28 Change 2 UK Restricted8-298-34 Change 3 UK Restricted8A-18A-2 Change 3 UK Restricted8A-38A-4 Change 1 UK Restricted8A-58A-6 Change 3 UK Restricted8B-18B-2 Change 1 UK Restricted8B-38B-4 Change 3 UK Restricted8B-58B-6 Change 1 UK Restricted8C-18C-2 Change 2 UK Restricted8D-18D-2 Change 2 UK Restricted8E-18E-2 Change 2 UK Restricted8F-18F-2 Change 2 UK Restricted Chapter 9 9-1 to 9-6 Change 1 UK Restricted 9-79-8 Change 2 UK Restricted Chapter 10 10-1 to 10-4 Original UK Restricted 10-510-6 Change 2 UK Restricted10-7 to 10-10 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 11 11-1 to 11-6 Original UK Restricted Chapter 12 12-1 to 12-8 Change 3 UK Restricted 12A-112A-2 Change 3 UK Restricted12B-112B-2 Change 3 UK Restricted12C-112C-2 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 13 13-1 to 13-8 Change 1 UK RestrictedUK RESTRICTED LEP-4 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED LEP-5 Change 3LIST OF EFFECTIVE PAGES Continued Subject Page Status ClassificationChapter 14 14-114-2 Change 3 UK Restricted 14-3 to 14-6 Change 1 UK Restricted14-7 to 14-16 Original UK Restricted14-1714-18 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 15 15-115-2 Change 1 UK Restricted 15-315-4 Change 2 UK Restricted15-5 to 15-8 Change 1 UK Restricted15-9 to 15-12 Original UK Restricted15-1315-14 Change 1 UK Restricted15-1515-16 Change 3 UK Restricted15-1715-18 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 16 16-116-2 Change 1 UK Restricted 16-316-4 Original UK Restricted16-5 to 16-24 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 17 17-1 to 17-4 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 18 18-1 to 18-4 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 19 19-119-2 Change 3 UK Restricted 19-319-4 Change 1 UK Restricted19-519-6 Original UK Restricted19-719-8 Change 3 UK Restricted19-9 to 19-12 Change 1 UK Restricted19-1319-14 Original UK Restricted19-1519-16 Change 2 UK Restricted19-17 to 19-20 Change 1 UK Restricted19-21 to 19-28 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 20 20-1 to 20-8 Change 2 UK Restricted 20-9 to 20-12 Change 3 UK Restricted20-1320-14 Change 1 UK Restricted20-1520-16 Change 3 UK Restricted20-17 to 20-24 Change 2 UK Restricted20-25 20-26 Change 1 UK Restricted20-2720-28 Change 3 UK Restricted20-29 to 20-32 Change 1 UK Restricted20-3320-34 Change 2 UK Restricted20-35 to 20-38 Change 1 UK Restricted20-39 to 20-42 Change 2 UK RestrictedUK RESTRICTED LEP-6 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED LEP-7 Change 3LIST OF EFFECTIVE PAGES Continued Subject Page Status ClassificationChapter 21 21-121-2 Change 3 UK Restricted 21-321-4 Change 1 UK Restricted21-521-6 Change 3 UK Restricted21-7 to 21-10 Original UK Restricted21-1121-12 Change 3 UK Restricted21-13 to 21-16 Change 1 UK Restricted21-17 to 21-24 Change 3 UK Restricted21A-121A-2 Change 1 UK Restricted21A-321A-4 Change 3 UK Restricted21A-521A-6 Change 1 UK Restricted21B-121B-2 Change 1 UK Restricted21B-321B-4 Original UK Restricted21B-521B-6 Change 1 UK Restricted21C-1 to 21C18 Change 3 UK Restricted21D-1 to 21D-4 Change 1 UK Restricted21E-121E-2 Change 3 UK Restricted21E-3 to 21E-6 Change 1 UK Restricted21F-121F-2 Change 1 UK Restricted21G-1 to 21G-6 Original UK Restricted21H-121H-2 Change 3 UK Restricted21H-321H-4 Change 1 UK Restricted21I-121I-2 Change 1 UK Restricted21J-1 to 21J-4 Change 3 UK Restricted21K-121K-2 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 22 22-122-2 Change 3 UK Restricted 22-3 to 22-6 Change 1 UK Restricted22-722-8 Change 3 UK Restricted22-922-10 Change 1 UK Restricted22-1122-12 Change 3 UK Restricted22-1322-14 Change 1 UK Restricted22-1522-16 Change 2 UK Restricted22-17 to 22-22 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 23 23-1 to 23-26 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 24 24-124-2 Change 2 UK Restricted 24-324-4 Change 3 UK Restricted24-524-6 Change 2 UK Restricted24A-1 to 24A-4 Change 1 UK Restricted24B-124B-2 Original UK Restricted24B-324B-4 Change 1 UK Restricted24C-124C-2 Change 1 UK Restricted 24C-324C-4 Origin al UK Restricted 24C-524C-6 Change 3 UK RestrictedUK RESTRICTED LEP-8 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED LEP-9 Change 3LIST OF EFFECTIVE PAGES Continued Subject Page Status ClassificationChapter 25 25-125-2 Change 1 UK Restricted 25-325-4 Change 3 UK Restricted25-5 to 25-8 Change 1 UK Restricted25-9 to 25-12 Change 3 UK Restricted25-13 to 25-22 Change 1 UK Restricted25A-1 to 25A-4 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 26 26-126-2 Change 3 UK Restricted 26-326-4 Change 1 UK Restricted26-5 to 26-22 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 27 27-1 to 27-4 Change 1 UK Restricted 27-527-6 Change 3 UK Restricted27-7 to 27-14 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 28 28-1 to 28-8 Change 1 UK Restricted 28-928-10 Original UK Restricted28A128A-2 Change 3 UK Restricted28A-328A-4 Change 1 UK Restricted28B-128B-2 Original UK Restricted28C-128C-2 Change 1 UK Restricted 28D-128D-2 Change 1 UK Restricted28E-128E-2 Change 1 UK Restricted28F-128F-2 Original UK Restricted Chapter 29 29-129-2 Original UK Restricted 29-3 to 29-6 Change 3 UK Restricted29-729-8 Change 1 UK Restricted29-929-10 Change 3 UK Restricted29-1129-12 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 30 30-130-2 Original UK Restricted 30-330-4 Change 3 UK Restricted30-5 to 30-14 Original UK Restricted30-1530-16 Change 1 UK Restricted30-1730-18 Original UK Restricted Chapter 31 31-1 to 31-4 Change 1 UK Restricted 31-531-6 Original UK Restricted31-731-8 Change 1 UK Restricted31-931-10 Original UK Restricted31-1131-12 Change 1 UK Restricted31-1331-14 Change 2 UK Restricted31-15 to 31-18 Original UK Restricted31-19 to 31-24 Change 1 UK RestrictedUK RESTRICTED LEP-10 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANKUK RESTRICTED BR 21701 UK RESTRICTED LEP-11 Change 3LIST OF EFFECTIVE PAGES Continued Subject Page Status ClassificationChapter 32 32-1 to 32-6 Original UK Restricted 32-732-8 Change 1 UK Restricted32-932-10 Original UK Restricted Chapter 33 33-1 to 33-4 Change 1 UK Restricted 33-533-6 Original UK Restricted33-7 to 33-10 Change 1 UK Restricted Chapter 34 34-134-2 Change 1 UK Restricted 34-334-4 Original UK Restricted34-534-6 Change 3 UK Restricted Chapter 35 35-1 to 35-4 Change 2 UK Restricted 35A-135A-2 Change 2 UK Restricted35B-1 to 35B-4 Change 2 UK Restricted Chapter 36 36-136-2 Change 1 UK Restricted 36-336-4 Change 2 UK Restricted36-5 to 36-10 Change 3 UK Restricted36A-1 to 36A-10 Change 3 UK Restricted36B-1 to 36B-8 Change 3 UK Restricted36C-1 to36C-4 Change 3 UK Restricted Index IND-1 to IND-10 Change 3 UK Restricted List of Effective Pages LEP-1 to LEP-12 Change 3 UK RestrictedUK RESTRICTED LEP-12 UK RESTRICTEDINTENTIONALLY BLANK